## Document
NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WAGES AND INFORMALITY IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

Costas Meghir

Renata Narita
Jean-Marc Robin

Working Paper 18347
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18347

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

## 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

August 2012

Costas Meghir thanks the ESRC for funding under the Professorial Fellowship RES-051-27-0204.
Robin gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Economic and Social Research Council
through the ESRC Centre for Microdata Methods and Practice grant RES-589-28-0001, and from the
European Research Council (ERC) grant ERC-2010-AdG-269693-WASP. We also thank the ESRC
Centre for Microeconomic Analysis of Public Policy at the Institute for Fiscal Studies. Responsibility
for any errors is ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2012 by Costas Meghir, Renata Narita, and Jean-Marc Robin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Wages and Informality in Developing Countries
Costas Meghir, Renata Narita, and Jean-Marc Robin
NBER Working Paper No. 18347
August 2012
JEL No. J24,J3,J42,J6,O17

## ABSTRACT
It is often argued that informal labor markets in developing countries promote growth by reducing
the impact of regulation. On the other hand informality may reduce the amount of social protection
offered to workers. We extend the wage-posting framework of Burdett and Mortensen (1998) to allow
heterogeneous firms to decide whether to locate in the formal or the informal sector, as well as set
wages. Workers engage in both off the job and on the job search. We estimate the model using Brazilian
micro data and evaluate the labor market and welfare effects of policies towards informality.

Costas Meghir
Department of Economics
Yale University

## 37 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06511
and IZA
and also NBER
c.meghir@yale.edu

Renata Narita
World Bank
1818 H Street,
NW Washington, DC 20433
renata.narita@gmail.com

Jean-Marc Robin
Université de Paris 1
Department of Economics
(Office room, J402)
Sciences Po
28 rue des Saints Pères

## 75007 Paris France
jeanmarc.robin@sciences-po.fr

## 1 Introduction
Informal labour markets are a standard feature of labour markets in developing coun

tries. These labour markets are generally seen as operating outside the tax and regu

latory framework of the country, not paying taxes or social security contributions of

any sort, violating minimum wage laws and not complying with employment pro

tection regulation. It is often argued that as a result they are the engine of growth

because their existence allows firms to operate in an environment where wage and

regulatory costs are lower. On the other hand, informality implies that the amount of

insurance offered to workers is lower. Moreover, informal markets are also subject

to regulatory costs: while formal firms pay income taxes and severance, informal

firms are subject to being caught and fined by the labour authorities. An interesting

policy question is to which degree stricter regulatory codes affect output, sector of

employment and the distribution of wages in the formal and the informal sector.

The most traditional view associates informality with a subsistence sector in a

segmented labor market market, restricted by the minimum wage and tax laws. Het

erogeneous workers sort themselves out of heterogeneous sectors according to the

classical representation of a competitive, segmented economy à la Roy. To date, a

large empirical literature has shown evidence against the segmented market view.

They usually find significant job mobility across sectors or workers reporting be
ing better off by taking up an informal job. [1] In accordance with the data and this

literature, our model allows for transitions between formal and informal sectors,

subject to informational frictions and choice. Workers can be exogenously laid off

or can take up a job opportunity in an alternative firm either in the same sector or in

1For example, Maloney (1999) shows no evidence of segmented markets for Mexico, where transitions between formal and informal sector seem to be equally probable in both directions. Barros,
Sedlacek and Varandas (1990), Neri (2002) and Curi and Menezes-Filho (2006) analyze Brazil and
also point to the significant mobility between sectors. Furthermore, Maloney et al (2007) shows for
Colombia that informal workers are more satisfied than formal workers in terms of job flexibility.
For Argentina, Pratap and Quintin (2006) findings suggest that informal workers can be as well off
as similar formal workers.

2

the other, and all the directions of mobility are potentially observable because jobs

(firms) are heterogeneous both between and within sectors. In order to account for

worker heterogeneity, we segment the market across observed characteristics, such

as completed education and gender. Finally, the policy environment is described by

corporate and labour taxes, severance payment, unemployment insurance, a legal

minimum wage and an intensity of monitoring of compliance by firms.

Our paper relates to that of Albrecht, Navarro and Vroman (2009) who use the

matching framework of Mortensen-Pissarides (1994) to model the informal sector

as unregulated self-employment with fixed productivity, while allowing for hetero

geneity in the formal sector. Bosch (2006) uses a similar framework and adds het

erogeneous productivity in the informal sector. The author assumes the two markets

are subject to the same frictions and direct job flows only take place from the infor

mal to the formal sector, with the assumption that formal workers never accept an

offer from the informal one. [2]

The model in this paper presents one major theoretical innovation with respect

to the existing literature. Specifically, our framework adds to the literature of equi
librium search models with heterogeneous firms and on-the-job search [3] by allowing

endogenous choice of sector by firms. We thus allow firms to differ in their pro

ductivity regardless of the sector in which they operate, implying that any type of

firm could act in a sector, with no ex-ante restriction on whether a sector is more

productive than the other.

The model is designed for analyzing economies with substantial informal and

formal sectors, found across a wide range of developing economies. Here we es

timate it using data from Brazil where informality of labour is about 40 percent of

2Other related papers are for example Gabriel Ulyssea (2010), El-Badaoui, Strobl and Walsh
(2010), Boeri and Garibaldi (2005), and Fugazza and Jacques (2003). They use a more simplified
structure for dual economies than that of Albrecht et al. (2009) and Bosch (2006).

3See e.g. Burdett and Mortensen (1998), Van den Berg and Ridder (1998), Van den Berg (2003)
and Bontemps, Robin and Van den Berg (2000).

3

the salaried labour force. [4] Our main source is the Brazilian Labour Force Survey,

_Pesquisa_ _Mensal_ _de_ _Emprego_, which provides a rotating panel of individuals sam

pled from the six main metropolitan regions of Brazil. Finally, the model allows us

to discuss the relative merits of alternative policies towards informality.

We draw the following conclusions. First, increasing the cost of informality by

10% actually improves welfare. The resulting increased competition among firms

in the formal sector is the main cause, which pushes up wages and thus welfare for

individuals in all states. Moreover, firms that remain informal are more than com

pensated by the increase in profit margins, following the move of marginal firms to

the formal sector. Second, if we go as far as abolishing informality the results are

more complex. First, in all cases workers’ welfare (including those unemployed)

increases substantially. This is both because they obtain formal jobs that are more

valuable and because in most cases formal sector wages go up due to increased

competition for workers among firms. Average firm profits can either increase or

decrease, depending on the specific market. The extent to which they decrease de

termines whether welfare will increase or not. Although the model does not predict

just one direction of welfare, in most markets we consider overall welfare goes up

with the abolition of informality.

In the next section, we present the model. In Section 3, we describe the data and

the details of estimation of the model. In Section 4, we present and comment on the

main results. In Section 5, we examine the effects of changes in the compliance costs

and other policies such as changes in severance and unemployment compensation.

Conclusions are in Section 6.

4Estimate based on recent cross sectional data (PNAD) and the entire salaried workforce.

4

## 2 The Equilibrium Search Model
We have in mind a pool of low skilled homogeneous workers that will typically

engage in jobs requiring low training input. This explains why we have decided to

construct a wage-posting model, instead of assuming a bargaining mechanism for

wage setting. Monopsonistic models are indeed usually thought as best suited to

labour markets with an abundant workforce. Productivity differences will arise in

this model because of firm level heterogeneity.

There are two sectors in the economy, the formal and the informal one. The two

sectors arise because of the existence of taxes and regulations governing the em

ployment of workers. Imperfect monitoring of compliance with the legal framework

creates profitable opportunities for lower productivity firms to ignore the regula

tions and operate in the informal sector. The policy environment is described by the

corporation tax on profits, income tax, social security contributions, severance pay

upon laying off a worker and unemployment insurance, which is implicitly funded

by taxes. All these features can be avoided when the worker is employed infor

mally. However, firms are monitored and if caught not complying they pay a fine.

Firms have a given productivity level, maximize profits and have to decide whether

to comply with the regulations or employ in the informal sector, risking a fine. So

the choice of sector is endogenous, which greatly complicates the determination of

the equilibrium _vis-à-vis_ standard wage-posting models _à la_ Burdett and Mortensen

(1998).

Workers seek to maximize their expected lifetime income. The flow utility of

workers depends linearly on the wage they receive plus the value of the social se

curity contributions made by the firm on their behalf, which we include in the wage

measure and are net of any taxes due. Workers also value severance pay and unem

ployment insurance as will be evident in the value function. The economy is subject

to search frictions and workers search both when unemployed and when they are

5

employed. They also receive competing offers from both sectors. Subscripts with

value 0 denote the unemployed, with value 1 denote the formal sector and with value

2 the informal one.

## 2.1 Workers
Workers maximize the expected lifetime income discounted at a rate of _r_ . At any

instant, unemployed workers receive an income stream _b_, taken to be constant across

individuals, regardless of their history. Let _W_ 1( _w_ ) and _W_ 2( _w_ ) denote the values of a

wage contract _w_ in the formal (sector 1) and the informal sectors (sector 2), and let

_U_ be the value of unemployment.

Individuals receive job offers according to a Poisson process with arrival rate

_λij_, where _i_ = 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 denotes the current state (unemployed, or working in the for
mal/informal sectors) and _j_ denotes the source of the offer. An offer is an employ

ment contract promising a _fixed_ wage and, implicitly, specific outside options. In

particular, a worker can receive offers from either sector - indeed we also allow

offers from the informal sector to the formal one and some of these offers may be

worth accepting - and can be laid off at sector-specific rates _λi_ 0 _,_ _i_ = 1 _,_ 2. Lastly,

_Fj,_ _j_ = 1 _,_ 2, defined on [ _W_ _j,W_ _j_ ], denotes the (equilibrium) distribution of (present

values of) contracts from which workers sample their offers. These distributions are

endogenous and the rest of the paper will explain how they are determined.

The wage in the formal sector represents the entire monetary compensation for

the worker: thus it is after tax but _before_ social security deductions, which are ef

fectively part of their compensation as it entitles them to a pension and to health

benefits. Pay also includes contributions to pensions made by the employer on be

half of the worker; in the informal sector no taxes or contributions are made so the

wage is just the gross wage.

The value functions for each state, namely employed in the informal sector, em

6

ployed in the formal sector and unemployed describe the optimal behavior of work

ers. As usual these values combine the immediate gains of being in the sector (e.g.

the wage) together with the resulting option values, such as the possibility of mov

ing to better jobs within or between sector or the impact of exogenous shocks, such

as the possibility of job destruction leading to unemployment. Thus the value of

working in the informal sector, is

_rW_ 2( _w_ ) = _w_ + _λ_ 20 [ _U −W_ 2( _w_ )]+ _λ_ 21 E _F_ 1 max _{W −W_ 2( _w_ ) _,_ 0 _}_

+ _λ_ 22 E _F_ 2 max _{W −W_ 2( _w_ ) _,_ 0 _},_

where E _Fj, j_ = 1 _,_ 2 _,_ takes expectations over a generic contract value _W_ distributed as

_Fj_ in sector _j._ Later in solving for equilibrium it is useful to rewrite this expression

after integrating by parts, [5]

_rW_ 2( _w_ ) = _w_ + _λ_ 20 [ _U −W_ 2( _w_ )]+ _λ_ 21

ˆ _WW_ 2( 1 _w_ )

_F_ 1( _x_ ) _dx_ + _λ_ 22

ˆ _WW_ 2( 2 _w_ )

_F_ 2( _x_ ) _dx,_ (1)

where overlines on distribution functions denote survival functions: _F_ = 1 _−F_ . Thus

the flow utility in the informal sector is the wage rate ( _w_ ) plus the loss that the

individual may incur if laid off, which happens at rate _λ_ 20, as well as the “capital

gain” of obtaining a better offer either from the formal or the informal sector with

rates _λ_ 21 and _λ_ 22 respectively.

A similar expression can be derived for the value of working in the formal sector.

The key difference here will be in the definition of the wage, which we discussed

5We make use of the following property. For any random variable _X_ with distribution (CDF) _F_
on [ _x,_ ~~_x_~~ ~~]~~, and for all _u ∈_ R,

max _{x_ _−_ _u,_ 0 _}_ _dF_ ( _x_ ) =

7

_u_

E _F_ max _{X −_ _u,_ 0 _}_ =

~~_x_~~
ˆ

_x_

~~_x_~~
ˆ

_F_ ( _x_ ) _dx._

before and in the expression for the loss incurred when moving to unemployment.

We write the value of employment in the formal sector (using the second expression

derived above) as

_rW_ 1( _w_ ) = _w_ + _λ_ 10 [ _U_ + _UI_ + _s_ _·_ _w_ _−W_ 1( _w_ )]

+ _λ_ 11

ˆ _W_ 1

_W_ 1( _w_ )

ˆ _WW_ 1( 2 _w_ )

_F_ 2( _x_ ) _dx._ (2)

_F_ 1( _x_ ) _dx_ + _λ_ 12

The cost of becoming unemployed is mitigated by two factors. The first is unem
ployment insurance (UI) which we assume for simplicity [6] is paid upfront. The sec
ond term is severance pay _s_ _·_ _w_, _s_ being the compensation rate in the case of termina
tion of employment. As we show below, we determine the level of UI endogenously

based on the tax rate used to fund it and on the overall number of unemployed. Both

UI and severance pay increase the value of employment in the formal sector – and

in the informal sector since a transition between the two is possible – and both affect

the equilibrium distribution of wages. The only difference of UI from severance pay

is that the firm directly pays the latter, whereas UI is funded by general taxation.

This distinction will be of importance when we define the firm’s problem. Finally,

since there are no shocks to productivity, jobs are only closed down because of ex
ogenous job destruction, which may differ depending on the sector, _λ_ 10 and _λ_ 20.

To write the value of unemployment note that in equilibrium, firms will only

offer acceptable wages so that the value at the minimum offered wage, _W_ ~~1~~ and _W_ 2,

are greater than _U_, otherwise no production would take place. So the equilibrium

value of unemployment is such that

_rU_ = _b_ + _λ_ 01( _µ_ 1 _−U_ )+ _λ_ 02( _µ_ 2 _−U_ ) _,_ (3)

6Specifically it avoids making the duration of unemployment a state variable if UI is time limited
for example.

8

where _µ_ 1 =

_W_ 1

_W_ ~~1~~

´

1

_W_ ~~1~~ _[xdF]_ [1][(] _[x]_ [)] _[,]_ _[µ]_ [2][ =]

_W_ 2

_W_ ~~2~~

´

2

_W_ ~~2~~ _[xdF]_ [2][(] _[x]_ [)][ denote the mean contract values offered]

in the formal and the informal sector respectively, and _b_ is the flow-value of leisure..

Contract values reflect the benefits, opportunities and costs of working in each

sector. They are increasing functions of wages, yet the wage rate alone is not suf

ficient for ranking jobs across sectors, because each sector comes with different fu

ture opportunities. It is thus possible that a move across sectors is accompanied by a

pay-cut. However in this model mobility within the sector can only take place when

accompanied by a wage rise, which has to imply a move to a higher productivity

firm. This is because there is no other source of heterogeneity (such as productivity

shocks) and because firms do not respond to outside offers.

## 2.2 Steady-State Worker Flows
The value functions discussed above describe the optimal choices of workers and are

conditional on the wage offer distributions in the formal and informal sectors. These

are equilibrium objects. To derive them we need to define the steady state flow of

workers between the three states (unemployment, formal and informal employment)

as well as the behavior of the firms. In steady state, the stocks of workers and firms

in each sector and in each part of the contract value distribution remains stable. We

now define these flows and use them to solve for the steady state stocks and for the

relationship between the equilibrium contract offer distribution and accepted offers.

Define the fraction of the labour force in each sector to be _mi,_ _i_ = 1 _,_ 2 _,_ and the un
employment rate to be _u_ = 1 _−_ _m_ 1 _−_ _m_ 2. Let _G_ 1( _W_ ) and _G_ 2( _W_ ) be the distributions

of accepted contract values in the formal and informal sectors, respectively: they

denote the proportion of the stock of individuals with a contract value lower than or

equal to _W_, respectively. First we define flows in and out of the formal sector along

9

the cumulative distribution of accepted contracts. Thus, for any _W_ [ _W_ 1 _,W_ 1],
_∈_

= _λ_ 01 _uF_ 1( _W_ )+ _λ_ 21 _m_ 2

_λ_ 10 + _λ_ 11 _F_ 1( _W_ )

_m_ 1 _G_ 1( _W_ )+ _λ_ 12 _m_ 1

_W_
ˆ _W_ ~~1~~

_F_ 2( _x_ ) _dG_ 1( _x_ )

_W_
ˆ _W_ 2

[ _F_ 1( _W_ ) _−_ _F_ 1( _x_ )] _dG_ 2( _x_ ) _._ (4)

The mass of workers in the formal sector at or below contract value _G_ 1( _W_ ) is

_m_ 1 _G_ 1( _W_ ). Some of these are destroyed because of exogenous layoffs ( _λ_ 10), receipt

of offers valued more than _W_ from other formal firms, and receipt of acceptable of
fers from the informal sector. [7] On the right hand side is the balancing job creation.

Jobs are created with contract values below _W_ in the formal sector, in when the un

employed accept offers less than _W_ or workers in the informal sector receive and

accept offers whose value is lower than _W_ . [8]

Similarly we can also define the flow equation for the informal sector. For _W_ _∈_

[ _W_ ~~2~~ _,W_ 2],

= _λ_ 02 _uF_ 2( _W_ )+ _λ_ 12 _m_ 1

_λ_ 20 + _λ_ 22 _F_ 2( _W_ )

_m_ 2 _G_ 2( _W_ )+ _λ_ 21 _m_ 2

_W_
ˆ _W_ ~~2~~

_F_ 1( _x_ ) _dG_ 2( _x_ )

_W_
ˆ _W_ 1

[ _F_ 2( _W_ ) _−_ _F_ 2( _x_ )] _dG_ 1( _x_ ) _._ (5)

In Appendix A we show how to (uniquely) solve equations (4) and (5) for the

distributions of accepted contracts _G_ 1 and _G_ 2 given the distribution of offered con
tracts _F_ 1 and _F_ 2. There exists an equilibrium relationship between the distribution of

7This is reflected in the integral since departures from all parts of _G_ 1( _W_ ) need to be recorded and
not only the ones leading to higher contract values than _W._

8Note that if needed _G_ 1 is extended outside its support by making it nil to the left of _W_ ~~1~~ and equal
to 1 to the right of _W_ 1.

10

accepted ( _G_ ) and offered ( _F_ ) contract values:

_λ_ 01 _F_ 1( _W_ ) Φ( _W_ )
_m_ 1 _G_ 1( _W_ ) = _−_ _u,_ (6)

_d_ 1( _W_ )

_λ_ 02 _F_ 2( _W_ )+ Φ( _W_ )
_m_ 2 _G_ 2( _W_ ) = _u,_ (7)

_d_ 2( _W_ )

where Φ( _W_ ) _≡_ Φ[ _F_ 1 _,_ _F_ 2]( _W_ ) is an operator on _F_ 1 and _F_ 2 that is derived in Appendix

A, and that is nil for all _W_ max _W_ 1 _,W_ ~~2~~, and where, in the denominator,
_≤_ _{_ _}_

_d_ 1( _W_ ) = _λ_ 10 + _λ_ 11 _F_ 1( _W_ )+ _λ_ 12 _F_ 2( _W_ ) _,_ (8)

_d_ 2( _W_ ) = _λ_ 20 + _λ_ 21 _F_ 1( _W_ )+ _λ_ 22 _F_ 2( _W_ ) _,_ (9)

are the total job destruction rates in sectors 1 and 2.

Straightforwardly, we can also derive expressions for the proportion of workers

in each sector and in unemployment, by setting _W_ (in equations (6) and (7) equal to

its largest value and making use of the fact that _m_ 1 + _m_ 2 + _u_ = 1:

_m_ 1 _λ_ 01 Φ( _W_ 1)

_−_ (10)
_u_ [=] _λ_ 10 + _λ_ 12 _F_ 2( _W_ 1) _[,]_

2 _λ_ 02 + Φ( _W_ 2)

_u_ [=] _λ_ 20 + _λ_ 21 _F_ 1( _W_ 2) _[,]_ (11)

_m_ 2

1 _[m]_ [1]
_u_ [=][ 1] [+] _u_

[1]

_[m]_ [2]
_u_ [+] _u_

_u_ _[.]_ (12)

Hence, knowledge of the distribution of wage offers by the formal sector, _F_ 1 _,_ and

the informal sector _F_ 2 _,_ allows us to infer the steady state stocks of employment ( _m_ 1

and _m_ 2) and unemployment ( _u_ ) as well as the equilibrium distribution of accepted

wages _G_ 1 and _G_ 2 that are observable. This is not a full characterization of equilib
rium; we now need to show how the offer distributions _F_ 1 and _F_ 2 and the decision to

post offers in one or the other sector are determined. This depends on firm behavior

11

to which we now turn.

## 2.3 Firms
Firms maximize profits by choosing in which sector to operate and the wage they

will post, which determines the size of their labour force, given their specific pro

ductivity _p._ In the formal sector there are a number of costs associated with hiring a

worker at a wage rate _w_ . These include payroll taxes ( _τ_ ), corporate taxes on profits

( _t_ ) and severance payments ( _s · w_ ) to workers who are laid off. Finally, these firms

may be subject to minimum wage laws _w_ min, which imply that firms cannot nec
essarily adjust pay to offset the effects of severance pay (Lazear, 1990). Informal

labour markets are monitored randomly by the government authorities whose role

is to enforce tax and labour laws. When caught a firm has to pay a fine depending

on its size. We denote as _C_ ( __ 2) the expected cost of informality, assumed convex in

firm size __ 2. This function will have to be estimated from the data, based on firm

behavior.

The strategy of the firm is to choose a contract value (or wage) to offer any

worker it contacts. The strategy will determine the attractiveness and hence the size

of the firm and hence in equilibrium there is a tradeoff between low labour costs and

size. There are no adjustment costs and, conditional on the wage they pay workers,

no dynamics in the decision problem of the firms. They just choose a wage and thus

implicitly a contract value _W_ to maximize profit flows.

Specifically, firms will offer optimal contracts _K_ 1( _p_ ) and _K_ 2( _p_ ) that solve the

following profit maximization problems given productivity _p_ :

_π_ 1( _p_ ) = max (13)
_W_ _≥_ max _{U,W_ 1( _w_ min) _}_ [(][1] _[−]_ _[t]_ [)[] _[p]_ _[−]_ [(][1] [+] _[τ]_ [ +] _[λ]_ [10] _[s]_ [)] _[w]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [)]] _[]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [)] _[,]_

_π_ 2( _p_ ) = max (14)
_W_ _≥_ max _{U,W_ 2( _w_ min) _}_ [[] _[p]_ _[−]_ _[w]_ [2][(] _[W]_ [)]] _[]_ [2][(] _[W]_ [)] _[−][C]_ [(] _[]_ [2][(] _[W]_ [))] _[,]_

12

where __ 1( _W_ ) and __ 2( _W_ ) are the size of informal and formal firms respectively, of
fering a wage contract worth _W_, and _w_ _j_ ( _W_ ) denotes the wage to be paid to a worker

in sector _j_ corresponding to a contract value _W._

The wage functions _w_ 1( _W_ ) and _w_ 2( _W_ ) are the wages defined by _W_ 1( _w_ ) = _W_ and

_W_ 2( _w_ ) = _W_, from equations (2) and (1) respectively. That is,

_F_ 2( _x_ ) _dx,_

(15)

(1+ _λ_ 10 _s_ ) _w_ 1( _W_ ) = ( _r_ + _λ_ 10) _W −λ_ 10 ( _U_ + _UI_ ) _−λ_ 11

and

ˆ _WW_ 1

_F_ 1( _x_ ) _dx−λ_ 12

ˆ _WW_ 2

_w_ 2( _W_ ) = ( _r_ + _λ_ 20) _W −_ _λ_ 20 _U −_ _λ_ 21

ˆ _WW_ 1

_F_ 1( _x_ ) _dx_ _−_ _λ_ 22

ˆ _WW_ 2

_F_ 2( _x_ ) _dx._ (16)

In steady-state, the flow of workers leaving the workforce of any firm ( _d_ 1( _W_ ) __ 1( _W_ )

and _d_ 2( _W_ ) __ 2( _W_ ) for the two sectors respectively) should be equal to the inflow of

new hires. Hence,

1
__ 1( _W_ ) =
_n_ 1

1
__ 2( _W_ ) =
_n_ 2

_h_ 1( _W_ )
(17)
_d_ 1( _W_ ) _[,]_

_h_ 2( _W_ )
(18)
_d_ 2( _W_ ) _[,]_

where _n_ 1 and _n_ 2 are the (endogenous) proportions of firms in the formal and informal

sector respectively, _h_ 1( _W_ ) and _h_ 2( _W_ ) denote the share of contacts between firms and

workers willing to accept a job paid _W_, i.e.

_h_ 1( _W_ ) = _λ_ 01 _u_ + _λ_ 11 _m_ 1 _G_ 1( _W_ )+ _λ_ 21 _m_ 2 _G_ 2( _W_ ) _,_ (19)

_h_ 2( _W_ ) = _λ_ 02 _u_ + _λ_ 12 _m_ 1 _G_ 1( _W_ )+ _λ_ 22 _m_ 2 _G_ 2( _W_ ) _,_ (20)

and _d_ 1( _W_ ) and _d_ 2( _W_ ) are the total job destruction rates (equation (8) and (9))).

13

## 2.4 Equilibrium Productivity Distributions
A key element of our model is that firms decide whether to post vacancies in the

formal or the informal sector as well as what wage to post. In equilibrium all strate

gies (given productivity) will yield equal profits, a property we now use to determine

how firms locate. Because of the various costs of employing workers in the formal

sector, we can expect firms with lower productivity to locate in the informal sector,

at least in the presence of minimum wages, if expected fines for informality are not

too high. However, there may be a range of productivities over which, in equilib

rium, firms are indifferent between the two sectors; indeed this turns out to be the

case. This is a particularly important feature of the model with key implications for

the welfare effects of policies towards informality. Of course, the fact that firms of

both types coexist over a productivity range does not mean they will have the same

size or pay the same rates; quite the contrary and we will discuss this later.

We assume that there exists a number of potential entrants, normalized to one,

with a distribution of productivity Γ0( _p_ ) on [ _p,_ ~~_p_~~ ~~]~~ . In equilibrium we will obtain a

measure of productivities in each sector. We denote the equilibrium measure of pro
ductivity in each sector by Γ _j_ ( _p_ ) ( _j_ = 1 _,_ 2). At the equilibrium, each firm maximises

profit flows given the equilibrium contract distributions. Hence,

Γ1( _p_ ) = _n_ 1 _F_ 1( _K_ 1( _p_ )) _,_ (21)

Γ2( _p_ ) = _n_ 2 _F_ 2( _K_ 2( _p_ )) _._ (22)

Denote the support of the measure for informal firms to be [ _p_ ~~2~~ _,_ ~~_p_~~ 2] and for formal

firms [ _p_ 1 _,_ ~~_p_~~ ], where it is possible that to have overlap in the supports, i.e. ~~_p_~~ 2 _>_ _p_ 1.

As discussed above, we expect that the equilibrium is such that the initial interval

of productivity will be occupied by informal firms only, i.e. _p_ _<_ _p_, and wage
2 1

offers may be below the formal minimum wage. For _p_ ~~1~~ _p_ ~~_p_~~ 2, firms operate in
_≤_ _≤_

14

both sectors. We also allow for the possibility that there is a range of productivities

( _p >_ ~~_p_~~ 2 ) where firms operate only in the formal sector. Given this, we shall consider

equilibria displaying the following regimes.

1. **Inactivity** : For _p_ _p <_ _p_, _π_ 1( _p_ ) _<_ 0, _π_ 2( _p_ ) _<_ 0, and Γ1( _p_ ) = Γ2( _p_ ) = 0.
~~2~~
_≤_

This is important to consider when discussing counterfactual policy experi

ments

2. **Informal** **sector** **only** : For _p_ _p_ _p_, _π_ 1( _p_ ) _<_ _π_ 2( _p_ ), Γ1( _p_ ) = 0, and
~~2~~ ~~1~~
_≤_ _≤_

Γ2( _p_ ) = Γ0( _p_ ) Γ0( _p_ ). It is possible that this interval is just zero, mean~~2~~
_−_

ing that the first relevant interval is the next one. The existence of this interval

depends on the relative importance of formal labor market regulation and the

costs of informality.

3. **Overlapping** **region** : In this region formal and informal firms of identical

productivity coexist and make the same profits: For _p_ ~~1~~ _p_ ~~_p_~~ 2, _π_ 1( _p_ ) =
_≤_ _≤_

_π_ 2( _p_ ), and

Γ1( _p_ )+ Γ2( _p_ ) = Γ0( _p_ ) Γ0( _p_ ) _._
2

_−_

4. **Formal sector only** : For all _p_ ~~_p_~~ 2, _π_ 1( _p_ ) _> π_ 2( _p_ ), Γ2( _p_ ) = Γ2 ~~(~~ ~~_p_~~ 2), and
_≥_

Γ1( _p_ ) = Γ0( _p_ ) Γ2 ~~(~~ ~~_p_~~ 2) Γ0( _p_ ~~2~~ ) _._

_−_ _−_

If there is a range of productivities where only formal firms operate, this will be in

the higher range. Implicit in this assertion is that informality profits are increasing

slower than formal profits, possibly because rapidly increasing costs of informality.

For example, if the probability of detection as well as the fines increase fast enough

with firm size, this will lead to convex costs of informality, making participation in

that sector unprofitable. However, we cannot exclude the theoretical possibility that

informal firms operate at all levels of productivity.

15

The computation of the equilibrium is not trivial. The way we calculate equi
librium distributions _Fj_ and sectors sizes _n j_ is described in Appendix B. Note that,

intuitively, what happens in the tail left to threshold _p_ is irrelevant. Hence, many
~~2~~

distributions Γ0 are compatible with the same equilibrium. For any distribution Γ0

that delivers an equilibrium ( _Fj,_ Γ _j,_ _n_ _j_ ), then distribution Γ0( _p_ ) =

ers an equilibrium with the same distributions _Fj,_ Γ _j_

[]

Γ0( _p_ ) _−_ Γ0( _p_ ~~2~~ )

0 ~~2~~ deliv
1 _−_ Γ0( _p_ ~~2~~ )

ers an equilibrium with the same distributions _Fj,_ Γ _j_ and with sector sizes _n_ _j_ = _n_ 1 _n_ + _jn_ 2 [.]

This remark will take full sense when we discuss the identification and estimation

This remark will take full sense when we discuss the identification and estimation

of the productivity distribution.

The nature of this equilibrium has interesting implications because it can ex

plain two seemingly contradictory assertions: first, we would expect compensating

differentials to increase wages of the workers taking informal jobs: in the overlap

ping region the informal firms may have to offer higher wages than equivalent (in

productivity) formal firms to make up for the lack of UI and severance pay and to

account for the different labor market opportunities. However, there are more for

mal jobs at higher levels of productivity than at lower ones. This will imply that on

average formal workers will be paid more than informal ones due to a composition

effect. Hence the model can explain what is observed in the data and at the same

time imply compensating differentials as we would expect.

## 3.1 The Brazilian labour force survey (PME)
Our main source of data consists of a panel of individuals of working age, sampled

by the labour force survey of Brazil, _Pesquisa Mensal de Emprego_ (PME). PME was

designed and conducted by the National Statistics Bureau to follow individuals of

the six main metropolitan regions of Brazil. Each individual is interviewed during

four consecutive months, then for another four consecutive months one year after

16

their entry into the sample. The sample period starts in January 2002 and goes until

December 2007. [9]

For the purpose of this paper, we select workers from age 23, where the chance

of returning to full time education is very low, up to age 65 who are found to be

either unemployed [10] or working as an employee (registered or unregistered). Our

definition of formal workers in this paper is thus whether the worker’s current job

is registered with the Ministry of Labour. [11] In Brazil, there is a federal minimum

wage, which should be the minimum paid to all formal employees. The average

legal minimum wage over the sample period is of 300 reais per month. [12] Workers

under a formal contract found to earn less than the minimum wage were removed

from the sample (8% of formal workers). We believe this is due to reporting error

and we similarly discard the 5% lowest wages out of the informal workers sample,

thus excluding mostly the zero-wage earners and some part-time jobs. We also trim

the very top wages (0.01% highest of the sample).

Table 1 shows the proportions of workers unemployed, formal salaried and in

formal salaried, by year. The cross-sectional sample contains about 66% of formal

salaried workers, 20% of informal salaried and 14% of unemployed. Over the period

2002-2007, we observe a large increase in the proportion of formal wage workers.

In particular, substantial changes have taken place more recently with the propor

tion of formal workers increasing from 64% in 2004 to 68% in 2007. Over the same

period, we observe a relatively large drop in the proportion unemployed.

9Due to methodological changes in the PME data with effect from 2002, we opted to use only
PME from year 2002. The first reason is that we solve for the steady-state, which is an assumption
hard to defend over a long period of time. The second reason is that PME from year 2002 contains
retrospective information about duration of the actual employment, which we need to identify jobto-job transitions.

10We take out unemployed whose last job was not as an employee. By doing so, we exclude mostly
unemployed who once was self-employed or inactive, e.g. individuals whose behavior deviate from
the predictions of our model.

11The job is registered if the worker reports having a worker’s card, which means that the workers
is protected by the Employment laws.

12All wages are in reais of June of 2008.

17

TABLE 1
_Working Status, by year_

2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Total
Unemployed 15.1 15.9 14.9 13.0 13.1 12.0 13.9
Formal salaried 64.7 63.6 63.9 65.7 66.5 68.4 65.6
Informal salaried 20.2 20.5 21.2 21.2 20.4 19.6 20.5

Note: Brazilian Labor Force Survey 2002-2007, individuals aged 23-65. The
values are percentages of individuals according to their working status at the
first interview.

Now, looking at our measure of informality (proportion of informal employees

in the population 23 to 65 years old), we see that a significant fraction of the work

force is informal in the six largest metropolitan regions of Brazil, an average of

21% of the active workforce. As Table 1 shows, informality increased in our data

until 2004 following the same trend observed since the 80s in the country. There

after informality decreased coinciding with an improvement in the business cycle.

Our model does not distinguish across periods. However, one could estimate over

different sub-periods to obtain a structural interpretation of the changes over time.

We follow individuals for up to four months or until their first move (if that

is sooner). This can be job-to-job, unemployment-to-job or job-to-unemployment,

where the job can be in the formal or in the informal sector. [13] At the date of the

first interview, we observe the worker’s employment status, the duration of the spell

(time elapsed) and the wage earned. From the subsequent three months, we construct

the censoring indicator (equal to one if the individual or data is missing in all three

following months), the remaining time in the status and the transition indicators.

We identify job-to-job transitions using the survey question on job duration. [14] For

example, we classify a worker as a non-mover in the third month of the interview

if she/he does not change status (e.g. remains formal) and declares that the current

13We do not use the entire sixteen-months window of PME due to attrition problems.
14This question is only available in PME after year 2002.

18

spell has lasted more than three months, i.e. more than the period that passed since

the last interview.

Table 2 presents information on the transitions based on all sample and by region.

The average exit rate from unemployment towards the formal sector is about 10%

and towards the informal one 15% implying an overall duration of unemployment

of 11 months. Exit from unemployment to an informal sector job is more frequent

and counter-cyclical judging from the exit rates over the downturn years of 2003 and

## 2004. Exit to the formal sector is trending up
Job to job mobility is much higher among informal workers than formal ones,

both within the informal sector and from informal to formal. Relatively to all tran

sitions which occur by sector, the transitions from the formal to the informal sector

are quite high compared to the transitions from the informal to the formal sector. Fi

nally, the transitions towards the formal sector have increased recently, as reflected

in the decrease in the rate of informality.

When we break these down by region, Recife and Salvador which are less de

veloped have a higher unemployment rate (18%) than the better off regions of Sao

Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Belo Horizonte and Porto Alegre (12%). [15] However, the

level of development does not have an obvious relationship either to the degree of

informality or to the turnover rates.

The way the model is set up, workers are homogeneous. [16] We thus focus on

low education workers and estimate the model separately by sex. This implicitly

assumes that the labour markets are segmented for these groups and they do not

compete directly. We define low education to mean those with eight or less years

15Over the period of analysis (2002-2007), the average GDP per capita in 2008 prices for the
Recife and Salvador regions were respectively 3.6 and 3.9 thousand dollars, whereas for Sao Paulo,
Rio de Janeiro, Belo Horizonte and Porto Alegre the figures were about twice as much or more: 11.2,
9.8, 6.2 and 8.5 thousand dollars, respectively.
16Ridder and Van den Berg (2003) assume segmented markets with workers with same ability
within market, but different across markets. Bontemps, Robin and Van den Berg (1999) include
worker heterogeneity within market through differences in the value of leisure. Shephard (2009)
uses this to consider the incidence of tax credits in a model with search frictions.

19

TABLE 2
_Description of Data, all sample and by region_

All sample Recife Salvador Belo Rio de Sao Porto
Horizonte Janeiro Paulo Alegre
Number of Individuals 441,249 61,822 56,873 83,278 64,544 107,592 67,140
Unemployed 58,004 10,338 10,687 8,959 7,566 13,875 6,579
Formal 290,243 36,238 35,156 57,367 43,500 70,009 47,973
Informal 93,002 15,246 11,030 16,952 13,478 23,708 12,588

Informality Rate (%) 24.3 29.6 23.9 22.8 23.7 25.3 20.8

Censored Observations (%) 24.4 33.8 21.6 25.3 17.4 22.6 26.6
Unemployed 34.5 45.8 28.7 39.9 24.2 31.0 38.3
Formal 20.9 28.7 18.7 21.1 15.1 19.7 23.2
Informal 29.0 37.8 23.6 31.7 20.7 26.5 33.3

Monthly transitions (% of workers by initial status)
Unemployed-Formal 9.75 9.28 5.04 15.75 6.07 8.72 18.95
Unemployed-Informal 15.34 20.34 6.34 22.36 8.48 17.63 20.33

Formal-Formal 2.15 2.06 2.15 2.07 2.18 1.72 2.93
Formal-Unemployed 2.01 2.63 1.74 2.33 1.06 2.02 2.33
Formal-Informal 0.33 0.48 0.14 0.50 0.12 0.32 0.40

Informal-Informal 5.66 5.97 5.14 6.93 4.77 5.31 5.98
Informal-Unemployed 6.55 9.94 4.76 8.08 2.58 6.79 6.94
Informal-Formal 1.12 1.16 0.61 1.77 0.67 0.84 1.86

Mean Duration (in months)
Unemployed 11.1 12.7 13.4 7.1 13.6 10.8 8.7
(std.dev) 12.9 14.7 14.6 9.1 13.3 11.9 10.4
Formal 70.0 71.9 70.8 64.8 76.9 70.4 67.7
(std.dev) 75.8 76.7 78.0 71.9 81.9 73.2 75.3
Informal 44.8 44.1 44.2 41.5 52.3 42.7 46.2
(std.dev) 65.3 64.2 65.1 62.6 72.3 62.0 67.8

Note: Brazilian Labor Force Survey 2002-2007, individuals aged 23-65. Transitions are the first
move of individuals within four months, starting from the individuals’ first interview.

20

of schooling. We also estimate the model separately for two regions with clearly

distinct labour markets, namely Sao Paulo and Salvador. The former is a well de

veloped low unemployment economy, while the latter is characterized by very high

levels of unemployment. Separating these regions is important, because both the job

destruction rates and the arrival rates are likely to be very different. Our empirical

work treats these as independent local labor markets.

Table 3 displays the composition of workers at the date of the first interview by

region and sex, the informality rate and turnover information. Informality is 3-4

percentage points higher among females, regardless of the region. Transitions out of

unemployment in Salvador are much lower than in Sao Paulo, but within Salvador

these transitions are much higher among males than females. Transitions out of

formal jobs are similar for males and females in Sao Paulo, but again the turnover

is larger among males than females in Salvador. On the contrary, the exit rate from

informal sector jobs to formal ones is 2.6 times larger for males than for females in

Sao Paulo and more similar across males and females in Salvador.

In Table 4 we show summary statistics of wages by region and sex and formal

versus informal sector. On average, within each region and sector, males are paid

more than females. Formal (informal) workers and those located in Sao Paulo (Sal

vador) earn more (less). The amount of wage dispersion (measured by the standard

deviation of log wages) is larger for males than for females in both regions. The

standard deviation of wages in the informal sector is larger than in the formal sector

across all groups and more pronouncedly in Sao Paulo.

## 3.2 Specification and Estimation
The estimation problem is much more complicated than for the standard Burdett

Mortensen model, such as discussed in Bontemps _et_ _al._ (2000). Because of the

endogenous choice of sector activity, the market equilibrium sets two distributions of

21

TABLE 3
_Description of Data, by region and sex_

Sao Paulo Salvador
Males Females Males Females
Number of Individuals 31,006 14,195 13,804 5,637
Unemployed 3,472 3,127 2,265 2,070
Formal 19,369 7,324 8,033 2,366
Informal 8,165 3,744 3,506 1,201

Informality Rate (%) 29.7 33.8 30.4 33.7

Censored Observations (%) 22.7 28.2 21.8 27.1
Unemployed 31.0 40.3 29.1 33.1
Formal 19.3 22.5 18.7 20.9
Informal 27.4 29.4 24.3 29.1

Transitions (% of workers by initial status)
Unemployed-Formal 8.85 4.28 4.98 1.73
Unemployed-Informal 25.71 11.09 11.20 3.10

Formal-Formal 1.61 1.25 2.59 2.08
Formal-Unemployed 2.03 2.04 2.01 1.28
Formal-Informal 0.39 0.37 0.29 0.11

Informal-Informal 6.49 6.17 5.92 4.47
Informal-Unemployed 8.18 6.02 5.96 4.47
Informal-Formal 1.10 0.42 0.53 0.47

Mean Duration (in months)
Unemployed 11.0 11.2 12.7 14.5
(std.dev) 12.8 12.7 14.5 15.8
Formal 74.2 64.6 69.5 76.3
(std.dev) 76.7 66.2 79.0 80.2
Informal 43.0 39.0 46.7 45.1
(std.dev) 64.8 61.8 70.0 66.9

Note: Brazilian Labor Force Survey 2002-2007, low education individuals aged
23-65. Transitions are the first move of individuals within four months, starting
from the individuals’ first interview.

22

TABLE 4
_Description of log wages, by region, sex and whether a_

_formal or an informal worker_

Sao Paulo Salvador
Males Females Males Females
Formal Sector Wages
Mean 6.67 6.38 6.36 6.15
Std. Dev. 0.42 0.34 0.39 0.31
Obs. 18,631 6,688 5,897 1,214

Informal Sector Wages
Mean 6.35 6.09 5.93 5.76
Std. Dev. 0.51 0.45 0.43 0.32
Obs. 7,669 3,397 2,945 926

Note: Brazilian Labor Force Survey 2002-2007, low education individuals aged 23-65.

labour contracts _and_ two distributions for the productivities of firms operating in the

formal and informal sectors. A new estimation strategy had to be devised such that

the distributions of contract values have first to be guessed so as to verify equilibrium

conditions given observables. Then, the distributions of firm productivities can be

identified through profit-maximizing restrictions.

**3.2.1** **Offer Distributions**

In Section 2.2, we have derived the way the offer distributions _Fj_ ( _W_ ) _, j_ = 1 _,_ 2 _,_ are

related to the accepted contract distributions _G j_ ( _W_ ) _, j_ = 1 _,_ 2. Adjusting these for

the fact that they are defined in the contract space rather than in the wage space, the

latter are observed and hence we can then estimate non-parametrically the offer dis

tributions. However, we simplify the estimation problem by specifying a parametric

23

distribution as approximation, namely a non standard beta distribution:

_x_ _W_ _j_

_−_
_W_ _j_ _W_ _j_
_−_

_,W_ _j_ _x_ _W_ _j,_
_≤_ _≤_

_Fj_ ( _x_ ) = betacdf

; _α j,_ _β j_

where betacdf( _·_ ; _α,_ _β_ ) is the CDF of a beta distribution with parameters _α_ and _β_ .

Let _F_ 1 and _F_ 2 be two candidate offer distributions, defined on the spaces of con

tract present values. Let _G_ _[∗]_ 1 [and] _[ G]_ 2 _[∗]_ [denote the observable distributions of] _[ wages]_ [ in]

both sectors. By construction, _G_ _[∗]_ 1 [(] _[w]_ [) =] _[ G]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [1][(] _[w]_ [))] _[,]_ [where] _[ W]_ [1][(] _[w]_ [)] [is] [the] [value] [of]

wage contract _w_ derived in equation (2). A similar restriction holds for the infor
mal sector. Given _F_ 1 and _F_ 2 we can use equations (6) and (7) to calculate _G_ 1 and

_G_ 2. The estimation algorithm first aims at finding the couple of offer distributions

( _F_ 1 _,_ _F_ 2) that best matches ( _G_ _[∗]_ 1

_[∗]_ 1 _[,]_ _[G][∗]_ 2 [)][ with][ (] _[G]_ [1] _[ ◦][W]_ [1] _[,]_ _[G]_ [2] _[ ◦][W]_ [2][)][.] [An important practical]

reason why a parametric specification is useful is that, in order to calculate the func
tion Φ of equations (6) and (7), and other transition rates (see below), we need to

calculate offer densities _f_ 1 = _F_ 1 _[]_ [and] _[f]_ [2][ =] _[ F]_ 2 _[]_ [.] [Assuming a parametric specification]

guarantees the smoothness of both the distribution function and its derivative.

To estimate the parameters we use the method of moments. We match the dis

tribution of wages for each sector and the transition rates implied by the model to

those observed in the data. Given the above specification, we need to estimate the

six arrival rates and the two job destruction rates all denoted by _**λ**_ = ( _λi j_ ) _i,_ _j_ =0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2

and six further parameters _**θ**_ = ( _W_ ~~1~~ _,W_ 1 _,W_ ~~2~~ _,W_ 2 _,_ _α_ 1 _,_ _β_ 1 _,_ _α_ 2 _,_ _β_ 2) characterizing the

offer distribution. Our algorithm estimates _**θ**_ given the _**λ**_ . We then update the latter.

Although we could iterate on all parameters at the same time, this turned out to be a

very quick procedure in practice.

Given the _**λ**_ we estimate _**θ**_ by minimizing the quadratic distance

_M_

## ∑
_k_ =0

_G_ _[∗]_ _j_

24

_Q_ 1( _**θ**_ _|_ _**λ**_ ) =

2

_j_ =1

_j_ [(] _[w]_ _jk_ [)] _[−]_ _[G][ j]_ [(] _[W]_ _jk_ [)]

2

_,_ (23)

where _Wjk,_ _k_ = 0 _,...,_ _M,_ defines a grid on the space of contract values, separately

for both sectors _j_ = 1 _,_ 2; _G_ _[∗]_ _j_

[]

_j_ [(] _[w]_ _[jk]_ [)] [is] [the] [observed] [wage] [distribution] [for] [sector] _[j]_

estimated from the data and evaluated at the implied grids for wages: _w_ _jk_ _w_ _j_ ( _Wjk_ ),
_≡_

using equations (15) and (16); and _G j_ ( _Wjk_ ) is the distribution of contracts in the

population of employed workers implied by the model and which depends on all

parameters ( _**θ**_ and _**λ**_ ).

We use Chebyshev nodes for the grid of contract values and we replace the inte

grals in contract spaces by Clenshaw-Curtis (CC) quadrature approximations. Com

putational details are provided in Appendix C.

**3.2.2** **Transition Rates**

In a similar way as we estimate _**θ**_ given _**λ**_, we can estimate _**λ**_ given _**θ**_ by matching

the appropriate moments. In the data we observe the proportion of workers in state

_i_ = 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 at the beginning of the survey moving to state _j_ = 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 before the end of

the survey, lasting _T_ periods ( _D_ [] _i j_ ). We can use the model to compute the theoretical

counterparts to these proportions ( _Di j_ ) as we show in Appendix C. For example the

proportion who were in a formal sector job and move to an alternative job within the

same sector is given by

_D_ 11 =

ˆ _WW_ 1 1

_λ_ 11 _F_ 1( _x_ )

(1 _e_ _[−][d]_ [1][(] _[x]_ [)] _[T]_ ) _dG_ 1( _x_ ) _._
_d_ 1( _x_ ) _−_

Now, in equilibrium,

__ 1( _x_ ) = [1]

_n_ 1

_h_ 1( _x_ )

_[m]_ [1]
_d_ 1( _x_ ) [=] _n_ 1

_dG_ 1( _x_ )

_dF_ 1( _x_ ) _[,]_

allowing to replace the derivative of _G_ 1 by that of _F_ 1 inside the integral. Then CC
quadrature can be used to approximate the integral.

25

We thus estimate _**λ**_ given _**θ**_ by minimizing the criterion

2

_Q_ 2( _**λ**_ _**θ**_ ) =

_|_

_i,_ _j_ =0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2

_Di j −_ _Di j_

_,_

where _Dij_ is the empirical counterpart of _Di j_ .

[]

**3.2.3** **Value of Leisure**

As mentioned above we allow unemployment insurance to be determined endoge

nously: in Brazil about 8.5% of receipts from labour taxes fund UI. Hence we com

pute the implied amount using the government budget constraint

~~_w_~~ 1
0 _._ 085 _τ_
ˆ _w_ ~~1~~

_x dG_ _[∗]_ 1

[]

_[∗]_ 1 [(] _[x]_ [) =] _[ UI][ ·]_ _[D]_ [10] _[.]_

where _D_ 10 is the average transition probability from a formal sector job to unemploy

ment and where _G_ _[∗]_ 1

[]

_[∗]_ 1 [is] [the] [estimated] [wage] [distribution.] [Remember] [that] [UI] [is] [paid]

to workers at the moment of transition into unemployment; hence this calculation is

useful for constructing an amount that is consistent with the expected expenditure

by Brazil and with the way we model UI.

Having estimated the contract values in both sectors and having set _U_ to be equal

to _W_ 2 (the legal minimum wage is not enforced in the informal sector and hence the

minimum observed wage is the reservation wage) we can use the value function for

the unemployed (3) to estimate the value of leisure, _b_ . [17]

17An important issue here is measurement error. At present we have not allowed for wages to be
measure with error. If we did, this would affect the estimation of the the distributions _G_ and the value
of leisure _b._

26

**3.2.4** **Productivity Distribution**

Up to this point, there has been no need to use the firm profit functions, the costs

of informality, or indeed the distribution of productivities: the arrival rates, the job

destruction rates and the wage offer distribution can be identified purely from the

distribution of wages and the transition rates. The offer distribution implicitly de

pends on the costs of informality however. Thus, counterfactual policy simulations

require an explicit specification and estimation of the costs of informality, which

will allow us to compute the new equilibrium.

We specify the cost function as _C_ = _c_ 2( _W_ ) _[γ]_, with _c_ and _γ_ being the parameters

to be estimated. Given values for _c_ and _γ_, and for _n_ 1 and _n_ 2 such that _n_ 1 + _n_ 2 _≤_ 1,

we solve for the labour force size in the formal sector ( __ 1( _W_ ) = _n_ [1]

_n_ 1

_h_ 1( _W_ )
_d_ 1( _W_ ) [) and in the]

_h_ 2( _W_ ) [From the firm’s maximization problem in each]
_d_ 2( _W_ ) [).]

informal sector ( __ 2( _W_ ) = _n_ [1] 2

informal sector ( __ 2( _W_ ) = _n_ [1]

sector, we can derive the way contracts and productivities are related. We start by

deriving the support of productivities in each sector and and we then show how we

derive the entire distributions. The key point is that firm profits, given productivity

are equalized, across sectors.

To derive the support note that the first order conditions for the firm’s optimiza

tion problem (see (13), (14)) gives

_[−]_ [1]

1 [(] _[W]_ [) = (][1] [+] _[τ]_ [ +] _[λ]_ [10] _[s]_ [)]

_K_ _[−]_ [1]

_w_ 1( _W_ )+ _w_ _[]_

_[]_ 1 [(] _[W]_ [)] _[]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [)]

__ _[]_

1 [(] _[W]_ [)]

_[]_

1 [(] _[W]_ [)]

_,_ (24)

2 _[−]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [) =] _[ w]_ [2][(] _[W]_ [)+] _[w]_ 2 _[]_ [(] _[W]_ [)] _[]_ [2][(] _[W]_ [)]
__ _[]_

2 [(] _[W]_

_K_ _[−]_ [1]

[2]

(25)

_[]_

2 [(] _[W]_ [) +] _[C]_ [1] _[γ][]_ [2][(] _[W]_ [)] _[γ][−]_ [1] _[,]_

where the expressions for _w_ _[]_

_j_ [(] _[W]_ [)][ and for] _[ ][]_

_j_ [(] _[W]_ [)][, as well as further details, are given]

in the appendix.

For each point of the contract grids, _Wjk_, one can thus calculate a point _p_ _jk_ =

_K_ _[−]_ _j_ [1][(] _[W][jk]_ [)][ on a productivity grid, with] _[p]_ 2 [=] _[p]_ [20][,] _[p]_ 1 [=] _[p]_ [10][,] ~~_[p]_~~ 2 [=] _[p]_ [2] _[N]_ [and] ~~_[p]_~~ 1 [=] _[p]_ [1] _[N]_ [,]

27

allowing the calculation of the productivity distributions as

Γ _j_ ( _p_ _jk_ ) = _n j_ _Fj_ ( _Wjk_ ) _,_ _j_ = 1 _,_ 2 _,_ _k_ = 0 _,...,_ _N._
_·_

To estimate the remaining parameters, _c_ and _γ_, and _n_ 1 and _n_ 2, we use the equilib
rium conditions requiring that _π_ 2( _p_ 2) = 0, and _π_ 1( _p_ ) = _π_ 2( _p_ ) _>_ 0 for _p_ [ _p_ 1 _,_ ~~_p_~~ 2].
_∈_

We thus estimate _c_ and _γ_, and _n_ 1 and _n_ 2 such that _n_ 1 + _n_ 2 = 1, so as to minimize

_M_

_π_ 2( _p_ 20) [2] +

_k,k_ _[]_ =0

_K_ ( _p_ 1 _k_ _p_ 2 _k_ )[ _π_ 1( _p_ 1 _k_ ) _π_ 2( _p_ 2 _k_ )] [2] _,_
_−_ _−_

where _K_ is a kernel density.

Lastly, the unconditional productivity distribution Γ0 follows as

Γ2( _p_ ) _,_ _p_ [ _p_ = _p_ _, p_ ] _,_
2 1
_∀_ _∈_

Γ0( _p_ ) =

Γ1( _p_ )+ Γ2( _p_ ) _,_ _p_ [ _p_ 1 _,_ ~~_p_~~ 2] _,_
_∀_ _∈_

_n_ 2 + Γ1( _p_ ) _,_ _∀p ∈_ ~~[~~ ~~_p_~~ 2 _,_ ~~_p_~~ 1 = ~~_p_~~ ~~]~~ _,_

with the additional restriction: Γ0( _p_ ) = 0. This distribution is the exogenous dis2

tribution of productivity truncated below at _p_ . There is no way one can identify the
2

portion of the distribution below _p_ .
2

## 3.3 Endogenous Arrival Rates: Estimating a Matching Function
Counterfactual simulations in a general equilibrium framework require accounting

for the impact of policy on arrival rates, as the number of job seekers and the num

ber of firms in the two sectors react to policy changes. To estimate the relationship

28

between arrival rates and search activity we specify a matching function _f_ ( _θ_ ), de

scribing the flow of matches as a function of market tightness (the effective number

of firms divided by the effective number of job seekers). [18] This is combined with

an assumption about the way these contacts are allocated between the formal and

the informal sector. We then identify the parameters of this model by imposing the

restriction implied by the matching functions on the job arrival rates separately for

each submarket using minimum distance.

Define market tightness as

_n_ 1 + _αn_ 2
_θ_ =
_u_ + _s_ 1 _m_ 1 + _s_ 2 _m_ 2

_._ (26)

where _s_ 1 and _s_ 2 are the search effort of those employed in the formal and the in
formal sector respectively relative the search effort of the unemployed _s_ 0, which we

normalize to one. Define the flow of contacts by the matching function _f_ ( _θ_ ) = _µθ_ _[η]_ .

We assume that the probability of an offer from the formal sector is _n_ 1 _/_ ( _n_ 1 + _αn_ 2)

and the informal one _αn_ 2 _/_ ( _n_ 1 + _αn_ 2), where _α_ denotes relative _visibility_ of infor
mal vacancies in the market. Given these specifications, the job offer arrival rates to

workers in state _i_ = 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 from the formal and the informal sector, can be written

respectively as

_n_ 1
_λi_ 1 = (27)
( _n_ 1 + _αn_ 2) _[s][i][ f]_ [(] _[θ]_ [)][;]

_αn_ 2
_λi_ 2 = (28)
( _n_ 1 + _αn_ 2) _[s][i][ f]_ [(] _[θ]_ [)] _[.]_

We do not attempt to estimate _η_, but we try alternatives based on the range of

18Since firms will hire anyone they meet offering them their posted wage the effective number
of firms relative to the effective number of job seekers is equivalent to the number of vacancies per
worker searching.

29

estimates from the literature. [19]

## 4 Results
We focus our estimation for low education individuals, for whom individual hetero

geneity is probaby less important. We present estimates separately for males and

females and for two contrasting regions of Brazil: wealthy and dynamic Sao Paulo

and the poorer region of Salvador, allowing us to see how the welfare effects of

policy towards informality may change with the context.

## 4.1 The Model Fit
Table 5 presents evidence on the fit of the model. The model is capable of repli

cating well the proportions of workers in the formal and informal sectors and the

unemployed and particularly well all the transitions between sectors. The distri

bution of wages is also very well replicated, although the fit is not always perfect,

particularly at the lower tail.

## 4.2 Frictional Parameters and the Level of Informality
Table 6 shows the estimates for the job destruction and the job arrival rates with as
sociated standard errors obtained using 500 bootstrap replications. [20] The estimated

job destruction rates are three to five times as high in the informal sector as in the

formal one. However, even informal jobs seem to be very stable, with an expected

duration of nearly five years in the absence of job to job mobility. Unemployed

19The elasticity of the matching function with respect to vacancies _η_ is usually estimated in the
range 0.3-0.5 (see, Petrongolo and Pissarides, 2001).

20The unit of time is a month. Subscript 0 refers to unemployment, 1 refers to the formal sector
and 2 to the informal. The arrival rates _λij_ denote an offer arriving from sector _j_ to someone currently
in sector _i._

30

TABLE 5
_Model Fit_

Sao Paulo Salvador
Males Females Males Females
Actual Model Actual Model Actual Model Actual Model
Formal Employment ( _m_ 1) 0.625 0.579 0.516 0.495 0.582 0.486 0.420 0.473
Informal Employment ( _m_ 2) 0.263 0.325 0.264 0.299 0.254 0.336 0.213 0.207
Unemployment ( _u_ ) 0.112 0.097 0.220 0.207 0.164 0.178 0.367 0.320

Transitions
_D_ 01 0.088 0.089 0.043 0.043 0.050 0.050 0.017 0.017
_D_ 02 0.257 0.257 0.111 0.111 0.112 0.112 0.031 0.031
_D_ 10 0.020 0.020 0.020 0.020 0.020 0.020 0.013 0.013
_D_ 11 0.016 0.016 0.013 0.013 0.026 0.026 0.021 0.021
_D_ 12 0.004 0.004 0.004 0.004 0.003 0.003 0.001 0.001
_D_ 20 0.082 0.082 0.075 0.075 0.060 0.060 0.045 0.045
_D_ 22 0.065 0.065 0.062 0.062 0.059 0.059 0.045 0.045
_D_ 21 0.011 0.011 0.008 0.008 0.005 0.005 0.005 0.005

Formal Wages (log)
P10 6.28 6.24 5.89 6.08 5.95 5.59 5.72 5.59
P25 6.42 6.51 6.27 6.29 6.09 6.09 5.90 5.91
Median 6.65 6.80 6.41 6.47 6.30 6.28 6.03 6.12
P75 6.93 6.95 6.58 6.63 6.57 6.50 6.25 6.27
P90 7.24 7.15 6.87 6.77 6.89 6.63 6.48 6.40

Informal Wages (log)
P10 5.87 5.20 5.86 5.50 5.59 5.32 5.41 5.23
P25 6.07 5.86 5.96 5.89 5.70 5.68 5.57 5.47
Median 6.34 6.42 6.16 6.18 5.88 5.94 5.69 5.74
P75 6.67 6.68 6.42 6.50 6.17 6.13 5.81 5.88
P90 7.04 6.98 6.75 6.67 6.51 6.30 6.04 6.01

31

TABLE 6
_Transition Parameters_

_λ_ 10 _λ_ 20 _λ_ 01 _λ_ 02 _λ_ 11 _λ_ 22 _λ_ 12 _λ_ 21
Sao Paulo

Males 0.0052 0.0223 0.0271 0.0789 0.0172 0.0652 0.0553 0.0039
(0.0003) (0.0010) (0.0019) (0.0032) (0.0020) (0.0058) (0.0148) (0.0004)
Females 0.0052 0.0203 0.0116 0.0301 0.0115 0.0629 0.0376 0.0028
(0.0005) (0.0013) (0.0013) (0.0021) (0.0022) (0.0117) (0.0194) (0.0005)

Salvador

Males 0.0051 0.0159 0.0136 0.0305 0.0383 0.0673 0.0619 0.0019
(0.0004) (0.0013) (0.0015) (0.0022) (0.0077) (0.0105) (0.0389) (0.0005)
Females 0.0033 0.0117 0.0044 0.0080 0.0364 0.0482 0.0661 0.0015
(0.0006) (0.0019) (0.0009) (0.0012) (0.0282) (0.0175) (0.0146) (0.0007)
Note: The unit of time is a month. Bootstrap standard errors in parentheses.

workers receive twice to three times as many job offers relative to those employed

in both regions. Interestingly, the arrival rates of offers from other informal jobs is

higher for individuals already working in either sector than for those who are un

employed. It is also easier to locate formal jobs once working in the formal sector.

However, obtaining formal job offers while working in the informal sector is much

harder than when unemployed.

Comparing across regions, Sao Paulo has higher destruction rates than Salvador

in the informal sector, while for both regions the destruction rates in the formal

sector are very small. Effectively formal jobs last a very long time. In the more

dynamic Sao Paulo informal jobs in particular, seem to be created and destroyed at

a much higher rate. Within sector offer rates are similar in both regions; however

in Sao Paulo the chance of obtaining an offer from the formal sector when in an

informal job, although low, is substantially higher than in Salvador. However the

key differences between the regions seems to be in job destruction rates and in offers

received when unemployed.

These differences reflect themselves in the implied unemployment rates: that of

Salvador is twice that of Sao Paulo (Table 5), which mirrors the data. The implied

proportion of formal and informal firms are essentially the same across markets

32

TABLE 7
_Proportion of Formal Firms by market_

Sao Paulo Salvador
Males Females Males Females
0.34 0.31 0.32 0.30
(0.04) (0.03) (0.04) (0.07)
Note: Bootstrap standard errors in parentheses.

TABLE 8
_Matching Function Estimates_

_µ_
_s_ 1 _s_ 2 _α_ _η_ = 0 _._ 3 _η_ = 0 _._ 5 _θ_
Sao Paulo

Males 0.668 0.485 3.937 0.091 0.067 4.586
(0.116) (0.041) (0.630) (0.004) (0.003) (0.682)
Females 1.119 1.167 4.206 0.046 0.037 2.896
(0.352) (0.224) (2.158) (0.008) (0.005) (1.581)
Salvador

Males 2.422 1.173 6.104 0.070 0.058 2.555
(0.808) (0.195) (2.032) (0.033) (0.031) (0.837)
Females 8.597 3.628 7.308 0.063 0.066 1.143
(3.150) (1.299) (5.707) (0.468) (0.051) (0.878)
Note: Bootstrap standard errors in parentheses.

(about 30%; see Table 7) – there is no data counterpart to this. The estimates of the

matching function that relates these transition rates to market tightness are shown

in Table 8. According to these estimates informal jobs are 4-6 times as visible as

formal ones. Moreover, search intensity is higher among the employed than the

unemployed in all submarkets but those for males in Sao Paulo.

**4.2.1** **Informality Cost and the Value of Leisure**

Table 9 presents the implied cost to the firm of remaining informal. This cost arises

from random monitoring and imposition of fines. We report the parameters of the

cost function, _C_ = _c_ 2( _W_ ) _[γ]_, and the mean cost per unit of profit. The costs are linear

in firm size for Sao Paulo and strictly convex for Salvador. In both cases the gradient

33

TABLE 9
_Cost of Informality and Value of Leisure_

_c_ _γ_ mean cost _-_ _b_
proft ratio
Sao Paulo

Males 54.5 1.0 0.148 -704.3
(14.2) (0.25) (0.046) (74.3)
Females 62.0 1.0 0.278 78.4
(11.4) (0.22) (0.088) (40.3)
Salvador

Males 70.5 1.5 0.243 7.7
(9.3) (0.46) (0.081) (40.5)
Females 72.5 1.6 0.282 182.7
(12.6) (0.66) (0.292) (21.3)
Note: Bootstrap standard errors in parentheses.

_c_ is very high for both males and females. These features imply that informality will

be concentrated among smaller firms as we would expect. This is an interesting

result particularly given that we do not observe firms directly.

In the last column of Table 9 we present the estimated flow value of leisure.

These are lower in Sao Paulo for each gender. Moreover, women value leisure much

more than for men, possibly reflecting the demands of families and home production.

The differences across regions are not significant in this case.

## 4.3 Formal and Informal Sector Productivity and Wages
A key feature of the equilibrium we describe is that given productivity, both formal

and informal firms can coexist. This can have important policy implications. Poli

cies that reduce informality will not necessarily shut down all jobs in this part of the

productivity distribution; on the other hand this should not be taken to imply that

such an exercise will be costless, because lower levels of productivity may be able

to sustain only smaller and fewer formal firms, given the amount of competition for

workers and the overall regulatory costs. We consider these issues by first describing

34

the equilibrium that results from our estimates and subsequently by counterfactual

simulations.

Based on the estimates we can back out the implied allocation of workers to

the formal and the informal sector for different levels of productivity, as well as

the pay structure. The results are presented in Tables 10 and 11 for low education

males, and in Tables 12 and 13 for low education women, in Sao Paulo and Salvador,

respectively.

For males the lowest point of support of the productivity distribution is similar

for both Sao Paulo and Salvador. However, all other percentiles are lower in Sal

vador, reflecting lower productivity and lower wages. In Sao Paulo there is less than

six percent of firms in the formal sector below the 10th percentile of the productivity

distribution. In Salvador formal firms start operating at a level of productivity above

the 25th percentile. In both markets, informality is to be found at decreasing rates at

all levels of productivity, but the size of formal firms increases rapidly.

One of the most interesting features of the model is the implied wage structure.

First, comparing wages and productivities the implied rents are quite high and partic

ularly so for low productivity firms. In both labor markets frictions imply substantial

rents accruing to firms, which of course can motivate welfare improving policies.

Second, the results justify two seemingly contradictory statements. Wages are

on average higher in the formal sector than in the informal one, because the formal

firms become increasingly large as productivity increases and wages increase with

productivity (as indeed in the standard Burdett and Mortensen model): this is a

composition effect. However, given productivity, for the most part formal firms

pay less than informal ones: this is a compensating differential for the UI, pension

entitlements and severance pay, although frictions and different job arrival rates will

imply that the relationship is not one-to-one with these benefits. This differential

declines and even gets reversed at the highest levels of productivity.

35

The overall picture is similar for women with some small differences: first for

mal firms in Salvador start operating at a higher point of the distribution of pro

ductivity like in the male market; second the wage structure is different and the

distribution of productivities do have different shapes. Comparing the wage struc

tures is not straightforward because of the differing productivities of the jobs they

tend to work and the resulting changes in composition. However, male wages in the

formal sector are more dispersed than those of females in both regions.

Table 14 presents male and female wages for the two regions by sector and over

all, at the same productivity level. In all cases, but the informal sector of Salvador,

women are paid more conditional on productivity, for lower productivity levels. This

is reversed at the higher productivity levels. Thus women in most cases seem to

work in more competitive labour markets with lower monopsony power for firms.

However, on average women are paid less than men because most of them work in

lower productivity (and hence lower paid) jobs. In other words the model interprets

discrimination as being due to the type of jobs in the female labour market.

## 5 Policy Analysis
The model aims at providing a framework for understanding the impact of reduc

ing or eliminating informality in an equilibrium setting. The latter is crucial here,

because we need to know how the wage structure will change and what will be the

overall welfare loss from such policies after allowing firms to relocate sector in re

sponse to the policy change. Note that we can only simulate reforms that decrease

the number of operating firms (increase _p_ ), as we have not identified the part of Γ0
~~2~~

below the inferred minimum productivity in the sample.

We simulate an increase in UI which we briefly discuss below. We then con

sider a policy that increases the cost of informality (possibly as a result of improved

36

37

38

TABLE 14
_Comparing male and female wages, by productivity_

Sao Paulo Salvador
Formal Informal Formal Informal
Productivity Males Females Males Females Males Females Males Females
6.00 - 3.889 2.423 4.786 4.096 4.948 5.318 5.567
6.25 - 5.047 4.702 5.503 5.316 5.590 5.820 5.813
6.50 5.063 5.787 5.571 6.049 5.800 6.116 6.041 5.950
6.75 5.843 6.192 6.081 6.298 6.285 6.267 6.218 6.077
7.00 6.390 6.473 6.557 6.499 6.437 6.334 6.299 6.320
7.25 6.715 6.629 6.784 6.675 6.566 6.399 6.449 6.604
Mean 6.765 6.477 6.437 6.226 6.275 6.096 5.946 5.720

detection rates or fines). We then simulate a bold counterfactual, where we close

down completely the informal sector. Table 15 reports estimates of the effects of

these changes on the composition of the workforce, firm size and welfare, for the

San Paolo region and for low-education males. Table 16 reports the effects on the

wage distributions and Table 17 the effects on the distributions of firm productivi

ties. Tables in Appendix D show results for other groups. Here we summarize the

implications.

## 5.1 Unemployment Insurance and Severance
We consider an increase of UI by 100%: although this sounds a lot, UI in Brazil

is quite low particularly because it is time limited: we increase it from one to two

minimum wages per month, payable for three months. [21] In our model such a policy

encourages employment, rather than the opposite, because it is payable upfront and

because once employed individuals have no endogenous incentive to quit – the only

way to claim again is to be laid off due to exogenous job destruction. In reality claim

ing UI after expiration requires six months legal work. Changing UI will change the

21UI benefit ranges from 1 to about 2 minimum wages monthly, depending on the average of the
three last wages received from last job, and are payable up to 5 months, depending on the last job
spell. The majority of low education workers are entitled to 1 minimum wage per month during about
3 months.

39

equilibrium distribution because it will increase the relative attractiveness of formal

jobs, it will increase the cost of formal employment and it will increase corporation

taxes, which is the source of funding - all our simulations keep government revenue

constant.

We only summarize the results. As we expect the effects of increasing UI from

such a low base are small but interesting: the increase in UI decreases overall welfare

because it decreases firm profits without increasing worker welfare. This is because

it increases the supply of workers to formal firms, which now become a bit larger,

although some lower productivity formal firms become informal. The resulting shift

increases the profits in the formal sector but decreases informal profits, with the

net effect being no change in worker’s welfare and an overall drop in firm profits.

Increasing severance pay by 5 percentage points has a very small **negative** effect on

welfare which can be related mainly to a small decline in formal profits.

## 5.2 Increasing the Cost of Informality
We now consider a 10% increase in the costs of informality. The reform is revenue

neutral; any increase in revenue from fines is redistributed by reducing corporation

tax. As seen in Table 15 this increases the proportion of formal firms, reduces unem

ployment and increases the proportion of workers in the formal sector. The resulting

average firm size declines.

The movements also lead to changes in the distribution of wages: as seen in

Table 16, mean wages in the informal sector in Sao Paulo decline by 8% and the

distribution (within that sector) becomes more compressed. Formal sector wages in

crease above the 25th percentile. Firms that are relocating to the formal sector tend

to be the higher productivity informal firms. Thus competition at the higher levels of

productivity increases and leads to more rents being captured by the workers. More

over, with the increase in revenues from fines in the informal sector, the corporation

40

tax decreases. The net effect is an increase in welfare overall (Table 15) and for all

concerned (formal and informal workers and firms as well as the unemployed). In

particular, the welfare of formal workers increases because their wages go up, due

to the increased competition; informal workers and the unemployed are also better

off because the value of a formal sector job, that they may move to, has increased.

This more than counteracts the decline in informal sector wages.

For females in Sao Paulo, (Tables D.1 and D.2) the proportion of formal firms do

not increase but the proportion of formal workers increases by 3 percentage poins

(pp) and there is a decline in unemployment. The increased supply of workers in

that sector forces contract values and wages down, particularly at the lower end. On

average, there is a small decrease in the values offered in the formal sector, following

an also slight decrease in wages in that sector. However, overall welfare still goes

up, mostly due to an increase in formal sector profits.

The results above were for Sao Paulo. For males in Salvador, Tables D.4 and

D.5 show that increasing the cost of informality has a positive but much smaller

impact on the overall welfare of workers and no effect on firms profits. This follows

from a 2-3% increase in wages in the formal sector, despite a 10% decline of wages

for the informal sector at all percentiles. As for females, Tables D.7 and D.8 show

that overall welfare increases; the decline in wages in the informal sector by about

4% at the median and more at lower percentiles is counteracted with an increase

in informal wages at higher percentiles. This occurs due to relocation of some low

productivity informal firms to the formal sector. Moreover, informal firm size goes

up by 2 percentage points, which leads to an increase in profits in the informal sector.

While there are differences in the results implied by variation in preference and

technology parameters across markets (regions and genders), one thing stands out:

reducing informality increases welfare overall. This is because the presence of in

formal firms limits the size of the more productive formal firms and at the same

41

TABLE 15
_Effects on the composition of workforce, firm size and welfare, of changes in the informality_

_cost, and of eliminating the informal sector - Sao Paulo, Low Education Males_

Increase in No Informal Sector
Benchmark _C_ Exogenous _λ_ ’s _η_ = 0 _._ 3 _η_ = 0 _._ 5
_m_ 1 0.58 0.60 0.84 0.95 0.93
_m_ 2 0.32 0.31 - - _u_ 0.10 0.09 0.16 0.05 0.07
_n_ 1 0.34 0.46 0.82 0.82 0.82
_n_ 2 0.66 0.54 - -

Formal firm size (Mean) 17.1 13.1 10.3 11.6 11.4
Informal firm size (Mean) 4.9 5.7 - -

Welfare (Reais($) per month)
Formal worker [ _rE_ ( _W_ 1)] 708.2 779.1 474.6 698.1 689.9
Informal worker [ _rE_ ( _W_ 2)] 532.4 577.2 - - Unemployed [ _rU_ ] 476.6 529.4 175.8 521.8 482.9
Average worker
628.7 694.2 426.8 689.1 676.3

[ _r_ ( _uU_ + _m_ 1 _E_ ( _W_ 1)+ _m_ 2 _E_ ( _W_ 2))]
Formal firm [ _E_ ( _π_ 1)] 1,671.5 1,425.7 1,564.3 817.8 967.3
Informal firm [ _E_ ( _π_ 2)] 239.9 363.0 - - Average firm [ _N_ 1 _E_ ( _π_ 1)+ _N_ 2 _E_ ( _π_ 2)] 726.6 851.8 1279.7 669.1 791.3
Total (Workers + Firms) 1,355.3 1,546.0 1,706.5 1,358.1 1,467.5
Government Revenue (formal sector) 610.4 572.6 638.7 636.8 637.5
Government Revenue (informal sector) 26.8 65.5 - -

Note: In all simulations government revenue is held constant through adjustments in corporate taxes.
The cost of informality ( _C_ ) is raised by 10 percent.

time allows the latter to keep more rents per worker. We now ask the question of

what would happen if we could abolish completely the informal sector. Clearly, this

eventuality is far outside the sample and we do not wish to imply that all effects are

captured here. However, this will give an idea of the direction of the effects.

## 5.3 Abolishing Informality
We now present an experiment where we close down the informal sector. The results

for Sao Paulo are in Tables 15 and 16. The Tables for the other markets are in

Appendix D. All simulations are revenue neutral, which is achieved by adjusting

the corporation tax. Note that in the absence of an informal sector the corporation

42

TABLE 16
_Effects on wages and overall wage inequality - Sao Paulo, Low Education Males_

Increase in No Informal Sector
Benchmark _C_ Exogenous _λ_ ’s _η_ = 0 _._ 3 _η_ = 0 _._ 5
Formal Wages (log)
P10 6.24 6.24 5.11 5.93 5.64
P25 6.51 6.64 5.57 6.44 6.29
Median 6.80 6.83 6.50 6.72 6.72
P75 6.95 7.05 6.88 6.86 6.94
P90 7.15 7.18 7.17 7.03 7.11
Mean 6.80 6.86 6.48 6.65 6.66

Informal Wages (log)
P10 5.20 5.32 - - P25 5.86 5.91 - - Median 6.42 6.44 - - P75 6.68 6.68 - - P90 6.98 6.89 - - Mean 6.51 6.43 - -

Overall Wage Inequality
P75/P25 1.71 1.77 3.69 1.52 1.91
P90/P10 3.43 3.77 7.82 3.00 4.35

Note: In all simulations government revenue is held constant through adjustments in corporate taxes.
The cost of informality ( _C_ ) is raised by 10 percent.

43

tax is non-distortionary because it is imposed on rents and hence can never affect the

decision of a firm either to hire or to operate. We present three different scenarios:

one in which the contact rates are kept fixed and two where they are endogenised as

shown in subsection 3.3, each with a different elasticity for the matching function.

With fixed contact rates (the _**λ**_ ) unemployment increases in all markets. Workers

welfare always declines, while overall welfare only increases for the male markets.

However, the results look very different once we allow the contact rates to adjust. In

this case unemployment declines in all markets and overall welfare increases as does

workers’ welfare. In Sao Paulo about 18% of firms now close down and the average

firm size declines to 11-12: many of the previously informal firms become relatively

small formal ones, reducing the average firm size. Despite the increased competition

among firms the increase in the number of workers has meant a decline in wages,

with respect to those in the formal sector and indeed a decrease in overall inequality.

With greater sensitivity of the matching function to labor market tightness wages

still decline but inequality goes up. The overall effect is an increase in workers’

welfare. However, what happens to firm profits depends on the the elasticity of

the matching function. At a low elasticity firm profits decline. When the elasticity is

higher profits increase. Most of these effects are common (to various degrees acrosss

markets). In all cases overall welfare increases with the abolition of informality and

so does workers’ welfare, driven by a decline in unemployment, a repositioning in

the higher paying and more productive formal sector and somewhat counteracted by

a decline in formal sector wages relative to the baseline.

Thus the key result that is found across all markets we look at is that abolishing

informality redistributes wealth towards workers. However, the extent to which this

happens varies with the specific conditions (reflected in the estimated parameters)

and does rely on allowing the contact rates to adjust as the number of job seekers and

firms change. Part of this redistribution occurs because workers are shifted to the

44

TABLE 17
_Effects on the distribution of productivity - Sao Paulo, Low Education Males_

Increase in No Informal Sector
Benchmark _C_ exogenous _λ_ ’s _η_ = 0 _._ 3 _η_ = 0 _._ 5
Formal Productivity (log)
P10 6.48 6.48 6.14 6.17 6.11
P25 6.71 6.75 6.34 6.46 6.37
Median 6.93 7.08 6.72 6.82 6.83
P75 7.19 7.31 7.22 7.09 7.09
P90 7.47 7.57 7.61 7.31 7.32
Mean 7.18 7.29 7.23 6.89 6.94

Informal Productivity (log)
P10 6.20 6.23 - - P25 6.38 6.40 - - Median 6.59 6.59 - - P75 6.81 6.74 - - P90 7.18 7.95 - - Mean 6.71 6.79 - -

Minimum Thresholds

_p_ 3.84 4.29 - - ~~2~~
_p_ 5.99 5.88 6.11 5.81 5.82
~~1~~

Note: In all simulations government revenue is held constant through adjustments in corporate taxes.
The cost of informality ( _C_ ) is raised by 10 percent.

formal sector, with an associated decrease in unemployment. Although wages in the

formal sector decline on average (Sao Paulo) or increase just marginally (Salvador

- depending on _η_ ) the formal sector wages remain much higher than the wages

in the informal sector. In terms of productivity formal firms still start operating

at the same level; so all low productivity informal firms that did not have formal

counterparts just close down and do not switch to the formal sector. However the

density of lower productivity formal firms increases as some of the informal firms

on the overlapping range switch to become formal.

45

## 6 Conclusions
Informality is extremely common in developing countries. While the phenomenon is

well recognised its effects are highly disputed and policy makers tend to be hesitant

in addressing the issue one way or another. With this paper we wish to contribute to

this debate.

On the one hand informal firms are portrayed as regulation busters that offer

a much needed competitive fringe. Hence they are considered job creators and an

indirect way by which employment protection legislation can be relaxed without

governments being accused of siding in favour of business and against the workers.

Moreover, informal firms have low productivity; an interpretation is that these jobs,

which would not have existed in a tightly regulated economy are allowed to exist

and hence increase employment. On the other hand workers in the informal sector

are often denied access to the benefits of modern societies, such as unemployment

insurance and public pensions (except at a minimum level) as well as a proper health

and safety framework.

To understand the balance between the pros and cons of informality we set up a

model with search frictions, costs of informality (because of penalties when caught)

and with endogenous decisions by both workers and firms as to where to work and

locate jobs respectively. Clearly a competitive framework would necessarily im

ply that informality is welfare improving, at least with risk neutral agents. Our

results show that search frictions are very important and without these elements in

the model it would be very hard to understand the role of informality. Our model is

motivated by the empirical observation that low skill workers are observed working

both in formal and informal jobs; there is little empirical support of the idea of com

parative advantage that leads to segmentation on the basis of skill - at least in the

observable dimension. In our model segmentation is endogenously determined by

an interplay between search frictions, the institutional requirements for formal firms

46

and the penalties of informality. This generates profit making opportunities by firms

selecting in either the formal or informal sector. In equilibrium profits are equalised.

Using the simulations from our model we draw two sets of important conclu

sions. First, marginal increases in regulation, such as UI, in the presence of an infor

mal sector have little or no perceptible effect on the economy; they also have little

effect in the distribution of activity between the formal and informal sector. How

ever, increasing the cost of informality by 10% actually improves overall welfare

and either reduces unemployment or leaves it unchanged in all markets we looked

at. The way the gains a redistributed really depends on the extent of search frictions.

In the more dynamic economy of Sao Paulo this also meant an increase in worlers’

welfare; in Salvador workers loose out, but only very marginally.

If we go as far as abolishing informality we obtain increases in welfare in all

markets we consider, so long as we allow the arrival rates of job offers to adjust

endogenously. In addition thorkers’ welfare also always uncreases and unemploy

ment declines. While the details of how the gains are distributed and what precisely

happens to wages differ by market the main result that informality decreases wel

fare, given the costs structure, remains. Viewing informality in the light of search

frictions, can alter fundamentally our views of its role: rather than being a benign

regulation busting mechanism it acts to redistribute welfare to firms and to reduce

overall welfare. Of course the result is predicated on the assumption that informal

firms incur detection costs.

## References
[1] Albrecht, James, Lucas Navarro, and Susan Vroman. 2009. "The Ef

fects of Labour Market Policies in an Economy with an Informal Sec

tor." _The Economic Journal_, 119(539): 1105–1129.

47

[2] Barros, Ricardo P., Guilherme L. Sedlacek, and Simone Varandas.

1990. “Segmentação e Mobilidade no Mercado de Trabalho: A

Carteira de Trabalho em São Paulo.” _Pesquisa_ _e_ _Planejamento_ _Eco-_

_nomico,_ 20(1): 87–103.

[3] Boeri, Tito, and Pietro Garibaldi. 2005. "Shadow Sorting." NBER

Chapters, in: NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2005

National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

[4] Bontemps, Christian, Jean-Marc Robin, and Gerard J. van den Berg.

1999. "An Empirical Equilibrium Job Search Model with Search on

the Job and Heterogeneous Workers and Firms." _International_ _Eco-_

_nomic Review_, Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania

and Osaka University Institute of Social and Economic Research As

sociation, 40(4): 1039-1074, November.

[5] Bontemps, Christian, Jean-Marc Robin, and Gerard J. van den Berg.

2000. "Equilibrium Search with Continuous Productivity Dispersion:

Theory and Nonparametric Estimation." _International_ _Economic_ _Re-_

_view_, 41(2): 305-358.

[6] Bosch, Mariano. 2006. "Job Creation and Job Destruction in the Pres

ence of Informal Labour Markets." mimeo, LSE.

[7] Burdett, Kenneth, and Dale T. Mortensen. 1998. "Wage Differentials,

Employer Size, and Unemployment." _International Economic Review_,

39(2): 257-273.

[8] Curi, Andréa Z., and Naercio A. Menezes-Filho. 2006. "O Mercado

de Trabalho Brasileiro é Segmentado? Alterações no Perfil da Infor

48

malidade e nos Diferenciais de Salários nas Décadas de 1980 e 1990."

_Estudos Economicos_, 36(4): 867-899.

[9] El-Badaoui, Eric Strobl, and Frank Walsh. 2010. “The Formal Sector

Wage Premium and Firm Size.” _Journal of Development Economics_,

91(1): 37-47.

[10] Fugazza, Marco, and Jean-Francois Jacques. 2003. "Labor Market In

stitutions, Taxation and Underground Economy." _Journal_ _of_ _Public_

_Economics_, 88(1-2): 395–418.

[11] Jolivet, Gregory, Fabien Postel-Vinay, and Jean-Marc Robin. 2006.

"The Empirical Content of a Job Search Model: Labor Mobility and

Wage Dispersion in Europe and the US." _European Economic Review_,

50(4): 877-907.

[12] Lazear, Edward P. 1990. “Job Security Provisions and Employment.”

_Quarterly Journal of Economics_, 105(3): 699-726.

[13] Maloney, William F. 1999. "Does Informality Imply Segmentation in

Urban Labor Markets? Evidence from Sectoral Transitions in Mex

ico." _The World Bank Economic Review_, 13(2): 275–302.

[14] Mortensen, Dale T., and Christopher A. Pissarides. 1994. "Job Cre

ation and Job Destruction in the Theory of Unemployment." _The Re-_

_view of Economic Studies_, 61(3): 397-415.

[15] Perry, Guillermo, William F. Maloney, Osmar S. Arias, Pablo Fajnzyl

ber, Andrew D. Mason, and Jaime Saavedra-Chanduvi. 2007. Infor

mality: Exit and Exclusion. The World Bank.

49

[16] Petrongolo, Barbara, and Christopher A. Pissarides. 2001. "Looking

into the Black Box: A Survey of the Matching Function." _Journal of_

_Economic Literature_, 39(2): 390-431.

[17] Pratap, Sangeeta, and Erwan Quintin. 2006. "Are Labor Markets Seg

mented in Developing Countries? A Semiparametric Approach." _Eu-_

_ropean Economic Review_, 50(7): 1817–1841.

[18] Ridder, Geert, and Van den Berg, Gerard J. 1998. "An Empirical Equi

librium Search Model of the Labor Market." _Econometrica_, 66(5):

1183–1221.

[19] Shephard, Andrew. 2009. "Equilibrium Search and Tax Credit Re

form." mimeo, Princeton University.

[20] Ulyssea, Gabriel. 2010. "Regulation of Entry, Labor Market Institu

tions and the Informal Sector." _Journal_ _of_ _Development_ _Economics_,

91(1): 87–99.

[21] Van den Berg, Gerard J. 2003. "Multiple Equilibria and Minimum

Wages in Labor Markets with Informational Frictions and Hetero

geneous Production Technologies." _International_ _Economic_ _Review_,

44(4): 1337-1357.

[22] Waldvogel, J. (2006): “Fast Construction of the Fejér and Clenshaw

Curtis Quadrature Rules,” BIT _Numerical Mathematic_, 46, 195–202.

50

## APPENDIX [FOR ONLINE PUBLICATION] **A Equilibrium Offer and Accepted Contract Distri-** **butions
In this section, we derive _G_ 1 and _G_ 2 from _F_ 1 and _F_ 2 _._

By equation (4), for any _W_ [ _W_ ~~1~~ _,W_ 1],
_∈_

_λ_ 10 + _λ_ 11 _F_ 1( _W_ )

= _λ_ 01 _uF_ 1( _W_ )+ _λ_ 21 _m_ 2

_m_ 1 _G_ 1( _W_ )+ _λ_ 12 _m_ 1

_W_
ˆ _W_ ~~1~~

_F_ 2( _x_ ) _dG_ 1( _x_ )

_W_
ˆ _W_ ~~2~~

Making use of the identities (integration by parts):

_W_
ˆ _W_ ~~2~~

[ _F_ 1( _W_ ) _−_ _F_ 1( _x_ )] _dG_ 2( _x_ ) _._

_G_ 1( _x_ ) _dF_ 2( _x_ ) _,_

_F_ 2( _x_ ) _dG_ 1( _x_ ) = _F_ 2( _W_ ) _G_ 1( _W_ )+

_W_
ˆ _W_ ~~1~~

_W_
ˆ _W_ ~~2~~

_W_
ˆ _W_ 1

[ _F_ 1( _W_ ) _−_ _F_ 1( _x_ )] _dG_ 2( _x_ ) =

_G_ 2( _x_ ) _dF_ 1( _x_ ) _,_

we can rewrite this equation as

_d_ 1( _W_ ) _[m]_ [1] (A.1)

_u_ _[G]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [) =] _[ λ]_ [01] _[F]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [)] _[−]_ [Φ][(] _[W]_ [)] _[,]_

where _d_ 1( _W_ ) = _λ_ 10 + _λ_ 11 _F_ 1( _W_ )+ _λ_ 12 _F_ 2( _W_ ) _,_ and

_W_
ˆ _W_ ~~2~~

_m_ 2

(A.2)
_u_ _[G]_ [2][(] _[x]_ [)] _[dF]_ [1][(] _[x]_ [)] _[.]_

Φ( _W_ ) = _λ_ 12

_W_
ˆ _W_ ~~1~~

_m_ 1

_u_ _[G]_ [1][(] _[x]_ [)] _[dF]_ [2][(] _[x]_ [)] _[−]_ _[λ]_ [21]

Turning to the informal sector, equation (5) indicates that for _W_ [ _W_ ~~2~~ _,W_ 2],
_∈_

_λ_ 20 + _λ_ 22 _F_ 2( _W_ )

= _λ_ 02 _uF_ 2( _W_ )+ _λ_ 12 _m_ 1

_m_ 2 _G_ 2( _W_ )+ _λ_ 21 _m_ 2

_W_
ˆ _W_ ~~2~~

_F_ 1( _x_ ) _dG_ 2( _x_ )

_W_
ˆ _W_ ~~1~~

[ _F_ 2( _W_ ) _−_ _F_ 2( _x_ )] _dG_ 1( _x_ ) _._

Using the same integrations by part, we obtain that

_d_ 2( _W_ ) _[m]_ [2] (A.3)

_u_ _[G]_ [2][(] _[W]_ [) =] _[ λ]_ [02] _[F]_ [2][(] _[W]_ [)+] [Φ][(] _[W]_ [)] _[,]_

where _d_ 2( _W_ ) = _λ_ 20 + _λ_ 21 _F_ 1( _W_ )+ _λ_ 22 _F_ 2( _W_ ).

Next, multiplying equation (A.1) by _[λ]_ [12] _[ f]_ [2][(] _[W]_ [)]

2 _[]_ [)] [and] [equation] [(A.3)] [by]

[12] [2][(] [)]

_d_ 1( _W_ ) (with _f_ 2 = _F_ 2 _[]_

51

_d_ 2( _W_ )

_−_ _[λ]_ [21] _[ f]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [)]

[21] [1][(] [)]

_−_ _d_ 2( _W_ ) [, and adding the two resulting equations, we obtain the first-order differential equa-]

tion

where

_A_ = _λ_ 01 _F_ 1

Φ _[]_ = _A_ _−_ _B_ Φ _,_ (A.4)

_λ_ 12 _f_ 2

12 _f_ 2

_d_ 1

[12] _[ f]_ [2] _[−]_ _[λ][λ]_ [21][02] _[ f][F]_ [1] [2]

[12] _[ f]_ [2]

_[λ]_ [21] _[ f]_ [1]
_d_ 1 [+] _d_ 2

_λ_ 21 _f_ 1

_B_ 01 = _F_ 1 _[λ]_ 12 [12] _d_ 1 _[ f]_ 2 [2] _[−]_ [+] _[λ][λ]_ [21][02] _[ f][F]_ [1] [2] _[,]_ 21 _d_ 2 1 _[,]_

[1]

_d_ 2 _[,]_

with boundary condition Φ( _U_ ) = 0 (in fact Φ( _W_ ) = 0 _,_ _W_ max _W_ ~~1~~ _,W_ ~~2~~ **).**
_∀_ _≤_ _{_ _}_

The solution of differential equation (A.4) is given by

_e_

_U_ _[B]_ [(] _[x][]_ [)] _[dx][]_ _A_ ( _x_ ) _dx_

Φ( _W_ ) =

_W_

_U_

´

_U_ _[e]_

_x_

_U_

´

_W_

_U_

´

_W_ _._ (A.5)

_U_ _[B]_ [(] _[x]_ [)] _[dx]_

Substituting this solution back into equations (A.1) and (A.3) we obtain the equilibrium
relationship between the distribution of offered ( _F_ ) and accepted ( _G_ ).

## B Computing the Equilibrium
In this section we describe the computation of the equilibrium.

1. Define contract value offer distribution _F_ 1 and _F_ 2, with supports bounds _W_ ~~2~~ = _U_ _<_
_W_ ~~1~~ _<_ _W_ 2 _<_ _W_ 1. Note that. from equation (3),

_W_ ~~2~~ = _U_ = _[b]_ [+] _[λ]_ [01] _[µ]_ [1][ +] _[λ]_ [02] _[µ]_ [2]

_r_ + _λ_ 01 + _λ_ 02

_._

Define the numbers of firms in each sector _n_ 1 _,_ _n_ 2, with _n_ 1 + _n_ 2 _≤_ 1.

2. Use steady-state flow condition (see Appendix (A)) to derive _m_ 1 _,_ _m_ 2 _,_ _u_ and _G_ 1 _,_ _G_ 2
from _F_ 1 _,_ _F_ 2.

## 3. Profit maximization then implies that optimal decision rules satisfy
1 _[−]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [) = (][1] [+] _[τ]_ [ +] _[λ]_ [10] _[s]_ [)[] _[w]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [)+] _[w]_ 1 _[]_ [(] _[W]_ [)] _[]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [)]
__ _[]_ 1 [(] _[W]_

_p_ = _K_ _[−]_ [1]

2 _[−]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [) =] _[ w]_ [2][(] _[W]_ [)+] _[w]_ 2 _[]_ [(] _[W]_ [)] _[]_ [2][(] _[W]_ [)]
__ _[]_ 2 [(] _[W]_ [)]

_[]_ 1 [(] _[W]_ [)]] _[,]_

_p_ = _K_ _[−]_ [1]

[2]

_[]_ 2 [(] _[W]_ [)] [+] _[C]_ [1] _[γ][]_ [2][(] _[W]_ [)] _[γ][−]_ [1] _[,]_

with

(1 + _λ_ 10 _s_ ) _w_ 1( _W_ ) = ( _r_ + _λ_ 10) _W_ _−_ _λ_ 10 ( _U_ + _UI_ ) _−_ _λ_ 11

ˆ _WW_ 1

_F_ 1( _x_ ) _dx_ _−_ _λ_ 12

ˆ _WW_ 2

ˆ _W_ 2

_F_ 2( _x_ ) _dx,_

(1 + _λ_ 10 _s_ ) _w_ _[]_ 1 [(] _[W]_ [) =] _[ r]_ [ +] _[λ]_ [10] [+] _[λ]_ [11] _[F]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [1][(] _[w]_ [))+] _[λ]_ [12] _[F]_ [2][(] _[W]_ [1][(] _[w]_ [))] _[,]_

__ 1( _W_ ) = [1]

_n_ 1

_h_ 1( _W_ )

[1]
_d_ 1( _W_ ) [=] _n_ 1

_λ_ 01 _u_ + _λ_ 11 _m_ 1 _G_ 1( _W_ )+ _λ_ 21 _m_ 2 _G_ 2( _W_ )

_,_
_λ_ 10 + _λ_ 11 _F_ 1( _W_ )+ _λ_ 12 _F_ 2( _W_ )

_h_ _[]_ 1 [(] _[W]_ [) =] _[ λ]_ [11] _[n]_ [1] _[]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [)] _[F]_ 1 _[]_ [(] _[W]_ [)+] _[λ]_ [21] _[n]_ [2] _[]_ [2][(] _[W]_ [)] _[F]_ 2 _[]_ [(] _[W]_ [)] _[,]_

52

with similar expressions for the informal section.

## 4. Then calculate productivity distributions
Γ1( _K_ 1 _[−]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [)) =] _[ n]_ [1] _[F]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [)] _[,]_

Γ2( _K_ 2 _[−]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [)) =] _[ n]_ [2] _[F]_ [2][(] _[W]_ [)] _[.]_

## 5. Consistency with the predetermined distribution of productivity Γ0 requires that
Γ0( _p_ ) =

_._

Γ0( _p_ )+ Γ2( _p_ ) _,_ _p_ [ _p_ _, p_ ] _,_
~~2~~ ~~2~~ ~~1~~
_∀_ _∈_
Γ0( _p_ ~~2~~ )+ Γ1( _p_ )+ Γ2( _p_ ) _,_ _p_ [ _p_ ~~1~~ _,_ ~~_p_~~ 2] _,_
_∀_ _∈_
Γ0( _p_ ~~2~~ )+ _n_ 2 + Γ1( _p_ ) _,_ _p_ [ ~~_p_~~ 2 _,_ ~~_p_~~ 1] _,_
_∀_ _∈_

with Γ0( _p_ ~~2~~ )+ _n_ 1 + _n_ 2 = 1 _._

6. If this consistency restriction is not satisfied, reiterate that sequence with another
guess of _F_ 1 _,_ _F_ 2 and _n_ 1 _,_ _n_ 2.

In practice we discretise functions and approximate integrals as described in the estimation
section, and we search for discrete approximations of _F_ 1 and _F_ 2, as well as shares _n_ 1 _,_ _n_ 1 so as
to minimize a distance between Γ0 and its prediction. The dimensionality of the optimization
problem can be reduced by using simple parametric approximations for _F_ 1 _,_ _F_ 2 such as the
beta distribution used in the estimation section.

## C Estimation
Let _F_ 1 and _F_ 2 be two candidate offer distributions, defined on the spaces of contract present
values. Although we could implement this procedure nonparametrically, we use non standard beta distributions as approximations:

_x_ _W_ _j_

_−_
_W_ _j_ _W_ _j_
_−_

_j_ = 1 _,_ 2; _W_ _j_ _x_ _W_ _j_
_≤_ _≤_

_Fj_ ( _x_ ) = betacdf

; _α_ _j,_ _β_ _j_

where betacdf( _·_ ; _α,_ _β_ ) is the CDF of a beta distribution with parameters _α_ and _β_ . An important practical reason why a (flexible) parametric specification is useful is that, in order to
calculate the function Φ and other transition rates (see below) we need to calculate offer densities _f_ 1 = _F_ 1 _[]_ [and] _[f]_ [2][ =] _[ F]_ 2 _[]_ [.] [Assuming a parametric specification guarantees the smoothness]

of both the distribution function and its derivative.

To estimate the parameters we use the method of moments. We match the distribution
of wages for each sector and the transition rates implied by the model to those observed
in the data. Given the above specification, we need to estimate the six arrival rates and
the two job destruction rates all denoted by _**λ**_ = ( _λij_ ) _i,_ _j_ =0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2 and six further parameters
_**θ**_ = ( _W_ ~~1~~ _,W_ 1 _,W_ ~~2~~ _,W_ 2 _,_ _α_ 1 _,_ _β_ 1 _,_ _α_ 2 _,_ _β_ 2) characterizing the offer distribution. Our algorithm
estimates _**θ**_ given the _**λ**_, then _**λ**_ given _**θ**_, and iterates until convergence. Although we could

53

estimate all parameters at the same time, this turned out to be a very quick procedure in
practice.

## C.1 Contract Offer Distributions
We start by taking the arrival rates _**λ**_ as given to estimate _**θ**_ as follows. Let _zk_ = cos( _kπ/M_ ) _,_ _k_ =
0 _,...,_ _M_, be _M_ + 1 Chebychev nodes on [ _−_ 1 _,_ 1]. These nodes allow to define grids on

[ _W_ ~~1~~ _,W_ 1] and [ _W_ ~~2~~ _,W_ 2] as

_[j]_ [+] _[W]_ _[j]_
_Wjk_ = _[W]_

[+] _[W]_ _[j]_ _[j][ −][W]_ _[j]_

+ _[W]_
2 2

_zk,_ _j_ = 1 _,_ 2 _,_ _k_ = 0 _,...,_ _M._
2

For each point on the grids, one can calculate a corresponding wage _w_ _jk_ using equations (15)
and (16), and replacing integrals by quadrature approximations. The appropriate quadrature
for Chebychev nodes is the Clenshaw-Curtis (CC) quadrature, whose weights _ωk_ can be
easily calculated using Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) (see Waldvogel, 2006). For example,
we have

(1 + _λ_ 10 _s_ ) _w_ 1 _k_ = ( _r_ + _λ_ 10) _W_ 1 _k −_ _λ_ 10 ( _W_ ~~2~~ + _UI_ )

_N_

## ∑
_n_ =0

_−_ _λ_ 11

_W_ ~~1~~ _W_ 1
_−_

2

_ωn_ **1** ( _W_ 1 _n>W_ 1 _k_ ) _F_ 1( _W_ 1 _n_ )

_N_

_n_ =0

_−_ _λ_ 12

_W_ ~~2~~ _W_ 2
_−_

2

_ωn_ **1** ( _W_ 2 _n>W_ 1 _k_ ) _F_ 2( _W_ 2 _n_ ) _,_

where **1** ( ) is the indicator function. A similar expression can be obtained to determine wage

_·_
nodes for the informal sector, _w_ 2 _k_ .

Then we search for _**θ**_ minimising

_G_ _[∗]_ _j_

_Q_ 1( _**θ**_ _**λ**_ ) =

_|_ _j_ =1 _,_ 2

_Q_ 1( _**θ**_ _**λ**_ ) =

_|_

_M_

_k_ =0

_j_ [(] _[w][ jk]_ [)] _[−]_ _[G][ j]_ [(] _[W][jk]_ [)]

2

_,_

where _G j_ ( _Wjk_ ) is calculated using equations (6) and (7), and replacing integrals by CCquadrature approximations, and _G_ _[∗]_ _j_ [is an estimate of wage distribution functions,.]

Note that, assuming that _U_ = _W_ 2 _≤_ _W_ ~~1~~ and _W_ 2 _≤_ _W_ 1, we have

[]

quadrature approximations, and _G_ _[∗]_ _j_ [is an estimate of wage distribution functions,.]

Note that, assuming that _U_ = _W_ 2 _≤_ _W_ ~~1~~ and _W_ 2 _≤_ _W_ 1, we have

[]

(1 + _λ_ 10 _s_ ) _w_ ~~1~~ = ( _r_ + _λ_ 10) _W_ ~~1~~ _−_ _λ_ 10 ( _W_ ~~2~~ + _UI_ ) _−_ _λ_ 11 ( _µ_ 1 _−W_ ~~1~~ ) _−_ _λ_ 12

ˆ _W_ 2

_W_ ~~1~~

_F_ 2( _x_ ) _dx,_ (C.1)

(1 + _λ_ 10 _s_ ~~)~~ ~~_w_~~ 1 = ( _r_ + _λ_ 10) _W_ 1 _−_ _λ_ 10 ( _W_ ~~2~~ + _UI_ ) _,_ (C.2)

_w_ ~~2~~ = _rW_ ~~2~~ _−_ _λ_ 21( _µ_ 1 _−W_ ~~2~~ ) _−_ _λ_ 22( _µ_ 2 _−W_ ~~2~~ ) _,_ (C.3)

ˆ _W_ 1

~~_w_~~ 2 = ( _r_ + _λ_ 20) _W_ 2 _λ_ 20 _W_ ~~2~~ _λ_ 21
_−_ _−_

_W_ 2

_F_ 1( _x_ ) _dx,_ (C.4)

where [ _w_ 1 _,_ ~~_w_~~ 1] and [ _w_ ~~2~~ _,_ ~~_w_~~ 2] are the observed wage supports in the formal and informal sec

54

tors, respectively, and with

_α_ 1
_µ_ 1 = _W_ ~~1~~ +( _W_ 1 _W_ ~~1~~ )
_−_ _α_ 1 + _β_ 1

_α_ 2
_µ_ 2 = _W_ ~~2~~ +( _W_ 2 _W_ ~~2~~ )
_−_ _α_ 2 + _β_ 2

_,_

_._

Hence, we can simplify the estimation problem slightly by using equations (C.2) and (C.3)
to substitute observed wage bounds _w_ ~~2~~ and ~~_w_~~ 1 for _W_ ~~2~~ = _U_ and _W_ 1 (given the _α,_ _β_ and
_W_ ~~1~~ _,W_ 2).

## C.2 Transition Rates
In a similar way as we estimate _**θ**_ given _**λ**_, we can estimate _**λ**_ given _**θ**_ . Natural counterparts
to the theoretical transition rates can be calculated from observed flows between states (0:
unemployment; 1: working in the formal sector; and 2: working in the informal sector).

From the labour force survey, we calculate the intensity of transitions from unemployment to job ( _D_ [] 0 _j_ ; _j_ = 1 _,_ 2), from a formal sector job to unemployment, to another job in the
same sector or to the informal sector ( _D_ [] 1 _j_ ; _j_ = 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2) and similar ones for a workers initially
in the informal sector ( _D_ [] 2 _j_ ; _j_ = 0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2). We then estimate our transition parameters using the
method of moments. We choose the parameters so as to match the observed transition rates
between sectors.

Consider first the workers who are unemployed at the date of the first interview, that we
follow over _T_ periods. Workers are not heterogeneous in this model and hence the remaining
unemployment duration is exponentially distributed. Thus the implied proportion of those
who move out of unemployment and into a job in sector _j_ over the time period of observation
_T_ is

_λ_ 0 _j_
_D_ 0 _j_ =
_λ_ 01 + _λ_ 02

(1 _−_ _e_ _[−]_ [(] _[λ]_ [01][+] _[λ]_ [02][)] _[T]_ ) _,_ _j_ = 1 _,_ 2 (C.5)

Now consider workers in the formal sector. Over _T_ periods the proportion making a
transition to an alternative job in the same sector, to a job in the informal sector or to unemployment is, respectively

_λ_ 12 _F_ 2( _x_ )

(1 _e_ _[−][d]_ [1][(] _[x]_ [)] _[T]_ ) _dG_ 1( _x_ ) _,_
_d_ 1( _x_ ) _−_

_λ_ 10
_d_ 1( _x_ ) [(][1] _[−]_ _[e][−][d]_ [1][(] _[x]_ [)] _[T]_ [)] _[dG]_ [1][(] _[x]_ [)] _[.]_

_D_ 11 =

_D_ 12 =

_D_ 10 =

ˆ _WW_ ~~1~~ 1

ˆ _WW_ ~~1~~ 1

ˆ _W_ 1

_W_ ~~1~~

_W_ ~~1~~

_λ_ 11 _F_ 1( _x_ )

(1 _e_ _[−][d]_ [1][(] _[x]_ [)] _[T]_ ) _dG_ 1( _x_ ) _,_ (C.6)
_d_ 1( _x_ ) _−_

_W_ ~~1~~

where _d_ 1( _W_ ) = _λ_ 10 + _λ_ 11 _F_ 1( _W_ )+ _λ_ 12 _F_ 2( _W_ ). Now, in equilibrium,

__ 1( _x_ ) = [1]

_n_ 1

_h_ 1( _x_ )

_[m]_ [1]
_d_ 1( _x_ ) [=] _n_ 1

55

_dG_ 1( _x_ )

_dF_ 1( _x_ ) _[,]_

allowing to replace the derivative of _G_ 1 by that of _F_ 1 inside the integral. This is useful as we
have parametrised _F_ 1 _,_ _F_ 2 using a continuous distribution. Then CC-quadrature can be used
to approximate the integral.

Similarly the corresponding transition rates for those observed working initially in the
informal sector are

_λ_ 21 _F_ 1( _x_ )

(1 _e_ _[−][d]_ [2][(] _[x]_ [)] _[T]_ ) _dG_ 2( _x_ ) _,_
_d_ 2( _x_ ) _−_

_λ_ 20
_d_ 2( _x_ ) [(][1] _[−]_ _[e][−][d]_ [2][(] _[x]_ [)] _[T]_ [)] _[dG]_ [2][(] _[x]_ [)] _[.]_

_D_ 22 =

_D_ 21 =

_D_ 20 =

ˆ _UW_ 2

ˆ _UW_ 2

ˆ _W_ 2

_U_

_U_

_λ_ 22 _F_ 2( _x_ )

(1 _e_ _[−][d]_ [2][(] _[x]_ [)] _[T]_ ) _dG_ 2( _x_ ) _,_ (C.7)
_d_ 2( _x_ ) _−_

_U_

with _d_ 2( _W_ ) = _λ_ 10 + _λ_ 11 _F_ 1( _W_ )+ _λ_ 12 _F_ 2( _W_ ) _._

These are the model counterparts for these empirical moments as functions of the arrival
rates, the job destruction rates, the offers distributions _Fi_ and as a function of the equilibrium
contract values distributions _Gi_ ( _i_ = 1 _,_ 2) _._ Contract offers and equilibrium distributions are
related by a complex function as explained in Appendix A.

We can thus estimate _**λ**_ given _**θ**_ by minimising the criterion

2

_Dij −_ _Dij_

_Q_ 2( _**λ**_ _**θ**_ ) =

## ∑
_|_ _i,_ _j_ =0 _,_ 1 _,_ 2

_,_

where _Di j_ is the empirical counterpart of _Dij_ .

We could minimize the two criteria _Q_ 1
a nested algorithm. []

We could minimize the two criteria _Q_ 1 and _Q_ 2 jointly but it is numerically faster to use
a nested algorithm.

## C.3 Productivity Distribution
Up to this point, there has been no need to use the firm profit functions, or indeed the distribution of productivities. To complete estimation we need to estimate the cost function of
informality. This will allow us to characterize the choice of firms to locate in either sector
and ultimately to carry out counterfactual simulations.

We specify the cost function as _C_ = _c_ 2( _W_ ) _[γ]_, with _C_ 1 and _γ_ being the parameters to
be estimated. Given values for _c_ and _γ_, and for _n_ 1 and _n_ 2 such that _n_ 1 + _n_ 2 = 1, we solve
for the labour force size in the formal sector ( __ 1( _W_ ) = [1] _h_ 1( _W_ ) [)] [and] [in] [the] [informal] [sector]

_hd_ 11(( _WW_ )) [)] [and] [in] [the] [informal] [sector]

( __ 2( _W_ ) = [1]

_n_ 1

_n_ 2

_hd_ 22(( _WW_ )) [).] [From] [the] [firm’s] [maximization] [problem] [in] [each] [sector,] [we] [next] [derive]

the support of the distribution of formal and informal productivities, i.e. _p_ 1 = _K_ 1 _[−]_ [1]

the support of the distribution of formal and informal productivities, i.e. _p_ 1 = _K_ 1 _[−]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [)][ and]

_p_ 2 = _K_ 2 _[−]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [)] [respectively.] [The] [first] [order] [conditions] [for] [the] [firm’s] [optimization] [problem]

2 _[−]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [)] [respectively.] [The] [first] [order] [conditions] [for] [the] [firm’s] [optimization] [problem]

56

(see (13), (14)) gives

1 _[−]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [) = (][1] [+] _[τ]_ [ +] _[λ]_ [10] _[s]_ [)[] _[w]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [)+] _[w]_ 1 _[]_ [(] _[W]_ [)] _[]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [)]
__ _[]_ 1 [(] _[W]_

_p_ 1 = _K_ 1 _[−]_ [1]

2 _[−]_ [1][(] _[W]_ [) =] _[ w]_ [2][(] _[W]_ [)+] _[w]_ 2 _[]_ [(] _[W]_ [)] _[]_ [2][(] _[W]_ [)]
__ _[]_ 2 [(] _[W]_ [)]

(C.8)

_[]_ 1 [(] _[W]_ [)]] _[,]_

_p_ 2 = _K_ 2 _[−]_ [1]

[2]

(C.9)

_[]_ 2 [(] _[W]_ [)] [+] _[C]_ [1] _[γ][]_ [2][(] _[W]_ [)] _[γ][−]_ [1] _[,]_

where the expressions for _w_ _[]_ 1 [(] _[W]_ [)] _[,][ i]_ [ =][ 1] _[,]_ [2, are given by]

_r_ + _λ_ 10 + _λ_ 11 _F_ 1( _W_ 1( _w_ ))+ _λ_ 12 _F_ 2( _W_ 1( _w_ ))

_[]_ 1 [(] _[W]_ [)] = _,_

1 + _λ_ 10 _s_

_[]_ 2 [(] _[W]_ [)] = _r_ + _λ_ 20 + _λ_ 21 _F_ 1( _W_ 2( _w_ ))+ _λ_ 22 _F_ 2( _W_ 2( _w_ )) _,_

_w_ _[]_

_,_
1 + _λ_ 10 _s_

_w_ _[]_ 2 [(] _[W]_ [)] = _r_ + _λ_ 20 + _λ_ 21 _F_ 1( _W_ 2( _w_ ))+ _λ_ 22 _F_ 2( _W_ 2( _w_ )) _,_

and where firm sizes can be differentiated using

_h_ _[]_ 1 [(] _[W]_ [) =] _[ λ]_ [11] _[m]_ [1] _[G][]_ 1 [(] _[W]_ [)+] _[λ]_ [21] _[m]_ [2] _[G][]_ 2 [(] _[W]_ [)]

= _λ_ 11 _n_ 1 __ 1( _W_ ) _F_ 1 _[]_ [(] _[W]_ [)+] _[λ]_ [21] _[n]_ [2] _[]_ [2][(] _[W]_ [)] _[F]_ 2 _[]_ [(] _[W]_ [)] _[,]_

with a similar expression for _h_ _[]_ 2 [(] _[W]_ [)][.]

For each point of the contract grids, _Wjk_, one can thus calculate a point _p_ _jk_ on a productivity grid, with _p_ 2 = _p_ 20, _p_ ~~1~~ = _p_ 10, ~~_p_~~ 2 = _p_ 2 _N_ and ~~_p_~~ 1 = _p_ 1 _N_ . This in turn allows to tabulate
productivity distributions as

Γ _j_ ( _p_ _jk_ ) = _n_ _j ·_ _Fj_ ( _Wjk_ ) _,_ _j_ = 1 _,_ 2 _,_ _k_ = 0 _,...,_ _N._

Equilibrium conditions require that _π_ 2( _p_ ~~2~~ ) = 0, and _π_ 1( _p_ ) = _π_ 2( _p_ ) _>_ 0 for _p_ [ _p_ ~~1~~ _,_ ~~_p_~~ 2].
_∈_
We thus estimate _C_ 1 and _γ_, and _n_ 1 and _n_ 2 such that _n_ 1 + _n_ 2 _≤_ 1, so as to minimize

_π_ 2( _p_ 20) [2] +

_M_

## ∑ K ( p 1 k p 2 k )[ π 1( p 1 k ) π 2( p 2 k )] [2],
_k,k_ _[]_ =0 _−_ _−_

where _K_ is a kernel density.

Lastly, the unconditional productivity distribution Γ0 follows as

Γ0( _p_ ) =

(

Γ2( _p_ ) _,_ _p_ [ _p_ _, p_ ] _,_
~~2~~ ~~1~~
_∀_ _∈_
Γ1( _p_ )+ Γ2( _p_ ) _,_ _p_ [ _p_ ~~1~~ _,_ ~~_p_~~ 2] _,_
_∀_ _∈_
_n_ 2 + Γ1( _p_ ) _,_ _p_ ~~[~~ ~~_p_~~ 2 _,_ ~~_p_~~ 1] _,_
_∀_ _∈_

with the additional restriction: Γ0( _p_ ) = 0.
~~2~~

57

## D Simulation Results
TABLE D.1
_Effects on the composition of workforce, firm size and welfare, of changes in the informality_

_cost, of eliminating the informal sector - Sao Paulo, Low Education Females_

Increase in No Informal Sector
Benchmark _C_ exogenous _λ_ ’s _η_ = 0 _._ 3 _η_ = 0 _._ 5
_m_ 1 0.49 0.52 0.69 0.89 0.87
_m_ 2 0.30 0.28 - - _u_ 0.21 0.20 0.31 0.11 0.13
_n_ 1 0.31 0.31 0.94 0.94 0.94
_n_ 2 0.69 0.69 - -

Formal firm size (Mean) 16.0 16.8 7.4 9.6 9.3
Informal firm size (Mean) 4.3 4.1 - -

Welfare (Reais($) per month)
Formal worker [ _rE_ ( _W_ 1)] 545.8 548.0 341.6 561.5 519.5
Informal worker [ _rE_ ( _W_ 2)] 440.5 434.7 - - Unemployed [ _rU_ ] 402.7 401.6 231.0 452.3 405.6
Average worker
484.8 486.7 307.5 550.0 504.6

[ _r_ ( _uU_ + _m_ 1 _E_ ( _W_ 1)+ _m_ 2 _E_ ( _W_ 2))]
Formal firm [ _E_ ( _π_ 1)] 1,252.1 1,309.1 657.9 544.2 523.7
Informal firm [ _E_ ( _π_ 2)] 133.7 121.5 - - Average firm [ _N_ 1 _E_ ( _π_ 1)+ _N_ 2 _E_ ( _π_ 2)] 480.4 489.7 616.1 509.6 490.4
Total (Workers + Firms) 965.2 976.4 923.6 1,059.6 995.0
Government Revenue (formal sector) 457.7 438.6 483.2 484.6 483.2
Government Revenue (informal sector) 26.8 45.8 - -

Note: In all simulations government revenue is held constant through adjustments in corporate taxes.
The cost of informality ( _C_ ) is raised by 10 percent.

58

TABLE D.2
_Effects on wages and overall wage inequality - Sao Paulo, Low Education Females_

Increase in No Informal Sector
Benchmark _C_ exogenous _λ_ ’s _η_ = 0 _._ 3 _η_ = 0 _._ 5
Formal Wages (log)
P10 6.08 6.07 5.14 5.88 5.58
P25 6.29 6.29 5.49 6.16 6.13
Median 6.47 6.47 5.91 6.44 6.36
P75 6.63 6.63 6.24 6.58 6.54
P90 6.77 6.77 6.51 6.75 6.69
Mean 6.51 6.49 6.02 6.41 6.35

Informal Wages (log)
P10 5.50 5.54 - - P25 5.89 5.88 - - Median 6.18 6.14 - - P75 6.50 6.35 - - P90 6.67 6.60 - - Mean 6.29 6.18 - -

Overall Wage Inequality
P75/P25 1.62 1.61 2.10 1.51 1.50
P90/P10 2.79 2.42 3.92 2.39 3.03

Note: In all simulations government revenue is held constant through adjustments in corporate taxes.
The cost of informality ( _C_ ) is raised by 10 percent.

59

TABLE D.3
_Effects on the distribution of productivity - Sao Paulo, Low Education Females_

Increase in No Informal Sector
Benchmark _C_ exogenous _λ_ ’s _η_ = 0 _._ 3 _η_ = 0 _._ 5
Formal Productivity (log)
P10 6.40 6.37 6.20 6.28 6.25
P25 6.57 6.58 6.35 6.44 6.44
Median 6.76 6.78 6.52 6.62 6.64
P75 6.95 7.03 6.83 6.85 6.82
P90 7.29 7.26 7.22 7.06 7.00
Mean 7.02 7.04 7.06 6.77 6.76

Informal Productivity (log)
P10 6.11 6.11 - - P25 6.18 6.17 - - Median 6.34 6.31 - - P75 6.62 6.43 - - P90 6.84 7.29 - - Mean 6.48 6.45 - -

Note: In all simulations government revenue is held constant through adjustments in corporate taxes.
The cost of informality ( _C_ ) is raised by 10 percent.

60

TABLE D.4
_Effects on the composition of workforce, firm size and welfare, of changes in the informality_

_cost, and of eliminating the informal sector - Salvador, Low Education Males_

Increase in No Informal Sector
Benchmark _C_ exogenous _λ_ ’s _η_ = 0 _._ 3 _η_ = 0 _._ 5
_m_ 1 0.49 0.50 0.73 0.90 0.86
_m_ 2 0.33 0.32 - - _u_ 0.18 0.18 0.27 0.10 0.14
_n_ 1 0.32 0.40 0.63 0.63 0.63
_n_ 2 0.68 0.60 - -

Formal firm size (Mean) 13.7 11.3 10.4 13.0 12.3
Informal firm size (Mean) 4.4 4.9 - -

Welfare (Reais($) per month)
Formal worker [ _rE_ ( _W_ 1)] 446.5 445.9 393.4 569.5 459.2
Informal worker [ _rE_ ( _W_ 2)] 334.8 329.8 - - Unemployed [ _rU_ ] 300.6 298.5 215.9 430.9 318.8
Average worker
383.0 382.3 344.7 556.0 439.1

[ _r_ ( _uU_ + _m_ 1 _E_ ( _W_ 1)+ _m_ 2 _E_ ( _W_ 2))]
Formal firm [ _E_ ( _π_ 1)] 726.8 570.5 845.4 507.4 495.1
Informal firm [ _E_ ( _π_ 2)] 117.8 145.9 - - Average firm [ _N_ 1 _E_ ( _π_ 1)+ _N_ 2 _E_ ( _π_ 2)] 312.7 315.8 529.2 317.6 309.9
Total (Workers + Firms) 695.7 698.0 873.9 873.6 749.0
Government Revenue (formal sector) 304.6 274.4 338.5 338.3 338.7
Government Revenue (informal sector) 34.0 63.6 - -

Note: In all simulations government revenue is held constant through adjustments in corporate taxes.
The cost of informality ( _C_ ) is raised by 10 percent.

61

TABLE D.5
_Effects on wages and overall wage inequality - Salvador, Low Education Males_

Increase in No informal sector
Benchmark _C_ exogenous _λ_ ’s _η_ = 0 _._ 3 _η_ = 0 _._ 5
Formal Wages (log)
P10 5.59 5.61 4.27 5.71 5.09
P25 6.09 6.09 5.70 6.27 5.93
Median 6.28 6.29 6.22 6.53 6.30
P75 6.50 6.51 6.54 6.66 6.53
P90 6.63 6.63 6.71 6.76 6.65
Mean 6.32 6.28 6.17 6.44 6.25

Informal Wages (log)
P10 5.32 5.31 - - P25 5.68 5.64 - - Median 5.94 5.89 - - P75 6.13 6.16 - - P90 6.30 6.31 - - Mean 6.00 5.91 - -

Overall Wage Inequality
P75/P25 1.75 1.78 2.31 1.47 1.81
P90/P10 3.53 3.48 5.47 2.85 4.79

Note: In all simulations government revenue is held constant through adjustments in corporate taxes.
The cost of informality ( _C_ ) is raised by 10 percent.

62

TABLE D.6
_Effects on the distribution of productivity - Salvador, Low Education Males_

Increase in No Informal Sector
Benchmark _C_ exogenous _λ_ ’s _η_ = 0 _._ 3 _η_ = 0 _._ 5
Formal Productivity (log)
P10 5.79 5.77 5.37 5.33 5.29
P25 6.06 6.06 5.63 5.71 5.59
Median 6.39 6.39 6.12 6.26 6.09
P75 6.63 6.62 6.50 6.59 6.44
P90 6.78 6.77 6.84 6.75 6.69
Mean 6.47 6.46 6.42 6.30 6.23

Informal Productivity (log)
P10 5.71 5.74 - - P25 5.89 5.90 - - Median 6.09 6.08 - - P75 6.30 6.18 - - P90 6.53 6.95 - - Mean 6.16 6.19 - -

Note: In all simulations government revenue is held constant through adjustments in corporate taxes.
The cost of informality ( _C_ ) is raised by 10 percent.

63

TABLE D.7
_Effects on the composition of workforce, firm size and welfare, of changes in the informality_

_cost, and of eliminating the informal sector - Salvador, Low Education Females_

Increase in No Informal Sector
Benchmark _C_ exogenous _λ_ ’s _η_ = 0 _._ 3 _η_ = 0 _._ 5
_m_ 1 0.47 0.46 0.58 0.80 0.72
_m_ 2 0.21 0.22 - - _u_ 0.32 0.32 0.42 0.20 0.28
_n_ 1 0.30 0.34 0.52 0.52 0.52
_n_ 2 0.70 0.66 - -

Formal firm size (Mean) 14.2 12.2 10.0 13.8 12.5
Informal firm size (Mean) 2.7 3.0 - -

Welfare (Reais($) per month)
Formal worker [ _rE_ ( _W_ 1)] 394.7 374.5 377.8 436.0 372.3
Informal worker [ _rE_ ( _W_ 2)] 284.2 264.0 - - Unemployed [ _rU_ ] 259.8 250.6 238.7 291.3 247.7
Average worker
328.6 310.3 319.0 406.7 337.4

[ _r_ ( _uU_ + _m_ 1 _E_ ( _W_ 1)+ _m_ 2 _E_ ( _W_ 2))]
Formal firm [ _E_ ( _π_ 1)] 457.9 435.8 297.7 461.4 325.1
Informal firm [ _E_ ( _π_ 2)] 43.2 69.5 - - Average firm [ _N_ 1 _E_ ( _π_ 1)+ _N_ 2 _E_ ( _π_ 2)] 167.6 194.1 154.5 239.5 168.7
Total (Workers + Firms) 496.2 504.3 473.5 646.2 506.1
Government Revenue (formal sector) 221.0 209.5 233.6 235.8 236.4
Government Revenue (informal sector) 15.4 26.5 - -

Note: In all simulations government revenue is held constant through adjustments in corporate taxes.
The cost of informality ( _C_ ) is raised by 10 percent.

64

TABLE D.8
_Effects on wages and overall wage inequality - Salvador, Low Education Females_

Increase in No Informal Sector
Benchmark _C_ exogenous _λ_ ’s _η_ = 0 _._ 3 _η_ = 0 _._ 5
Formal Wages (log)
P10 5.59 5.43 5.49 5.35 5.36
P25 5.91 5.81 5.84 6.01 5.78
Median 6.12 6.04 6.06 6.22 6.03
P75 6.27 6.21 6.30 6.37 6.21
P90 6.40 6.35 6.37 6.50 6.36
Mean 6.14 6.04 6.05 6.16 6.00

Informal Wages (log)
P10 5.23 4.78 - - P25 5.47 5.19 - - Median 5.74 5.61 - - P75 5.88 5.80 - - P90 6.01 5.98 - - Mean 5.76 5.57 - -

Overall Wage Inequality
P75/P25 1.54 1.78 1.58 1.43 1.53
P90/P10 2.60 3.16 2.39 3.16 2.72

Note: In all simulations government revenue is held constant through adjustments in corporate taxes.
The cost of informality ( _C_ ) is raised by 10 percent.

65

TABLE D.9
_Effects on the distribution of productivity - Salvador, Low Education Females_

Increase in No Informal Sector
Benchmark _C_ exogenous _λ_ ’s _η_ = 0 _._ 3 _η_ = 0 _._ 5
Formal Productivity (log)
P10 5.78 5.43 6.04 4.28 4.58
P25 5.94 5.81 5.96 4.83 5.30
Median 6.15 6.04 6.10 5.83 5.76
P75 6.38 6.21 6.26 6.16 6.06
P90 6.53 6.35 6.51 6.46 6.37
Mean 6.23 6.04 6.31 5.82 5.82

Informal Productivity (log)
P10 5.58 4.78 - - P25 5.64 5.19 - - Median 5.79 5.61 - - P75 6.06 5.80 - - P90 6.27 5.98 - - Mean 5.92 5.57 - -

Note: In all simulations government revenue is held constant through adjustments in corporate taxes.
The cost of informality ( _C_ ) is raised by 10 percent.

66